The Optimal Twisted Paper Cylinder
Noah Montgomery and Richard Evan Schwartz ∗
September 24, 2025
Abstract
An embedded twisted paper cylinder of aspect ratio λ is a smooth
isometric embedding of a ﬂat λ × 1 cylinder into R3 such that the
images of the boundary components are linked. We prove that for
such an object to exist we must have λ > 2 and that this bound
is sharp. We also show that any sequence of examples having aspect
ratio converging to 2 must converge to a (non-smooth) 4-fold wrapping
of a right-angled isosceles triangle.
1
Introduction
1.1
Context
The purpose of this paper is to prove the analogues for cylinders of the results
about Moebius bands proved in [S1].
The paper [S1] deals with the cutoﬀvalue for the aspect ratio of a rectan-
gle which one can twist in space to make an embedded paper Moebius band.
The main result of [S1], conjectured in 1977 by Ben Halpern and Charles
Weaver [HW], is that a smooth embedded paper Moebius band must have
aspect ratio greater than
√
3. A secondary result in [S1] is that any sequence
of embedded paper Moebius bands with aspect ratio converging to
√
3 must
converge (up to isometries) to a limiting example called the triangular Moe-
bius band. The triangular Moebius band is a certain 3-fold wrapping of an
equilateral triangle.
Since [S1] appeared there has been more work on related topics:
∗R.E.S. is supported by N.S.F. Grant DMS-2102802 and a Simons Sabbatical Fellowship
1
arXiv:2309.14033v5  [math.MG]  22 Sep 2025


• The paper [S2] gives an explicit estimate for the convergence in [S1]: If
ǫ < 1/324 and a paper Moebius band has aspect ratio less than
√
3+ǫ,
then it is within 18√ǫ of an equilateral triangle in the Hausdorﬀmetric.
• In [BrS], Brienne Brown and the second author show that one can make
a 3-twist paper Moebius band having aspect ratio λ for any λ > 3. They
also present two polygonal paper Moebius bands of aspect ratio 3 and
conjecture that any aspect-ratio minimizing sequence must converge,
on a subsequence, to one of them.
• In [H], Aidan Hennessey showed that one can make an embedded pa-
per Moebius band or a cylinder with as many twists as desired using a
rectangle of aspect ratio 6. In an unpublished observation, Jan Nein-
haus optimized Hennessey’s contruction and showed that, for Moebius
bands, the aspect ratio 3
√
3 + ǫ suﬃces for any ǫ > 0.
Paper Moebius bands and cylinders are closely related to folded ribbon
knots.
Informally, a folded ribbon knot is a planar polygonal version of
a paper Moebius band or cylinder, with extra combinatorial information
keeping track of “inﬁnitesimal over-crossings and under-crossings”. See [DL]
and [D] for a wealth of information about these. With a bit of soft work
concerning smooth approximations of folded ribbon knots (along the lines of
§4 below) our results below resolve the case n = 1 of [DL, Conjecture 39].
1.2
The Aspect Ratio Bound
An embedded paper cylinder of aspect ratio λ is a C∞, injective, arc-length
preserving map
I : Γλ →R3,
(1)
where Γλ is the ﬂat cylinder of aspect ratio λ:
Γλ = [0, λ] × [0, 1]/ ∼,
(0, y) ∼(λ, y).
(2)
We call an embedded paper cylinder twisted if the two boundary com-
ponents form a nonsplit link. (This means that the two components cannot
be separated by a topological 2-sphere.) The reason for the name is that if
you take a rectangular strip of paper, give it a 360 degree twist, and join
the ends together in space, then you get a paper cylinder whose boundary
components form a Hopf link, the simplest example of an nonsplit link.
2


Theorem 1.1 An embedded twisted paper cylinder has aspect ratio greater
than 2.
We give two proofs of Theorem 1.1. One is similar to the proof in [S1],
and the other uses some ideas about convex hulls.
With small changes,
our proofs also work for immersed paper cylinders with linked boundary
components. This is in contrast to the results in [S1], which depend crucially
on the embedding property. The main change is that Lemma 2.1 should be
formulated in the immersed case. See the remark at the end of §5.
We can also weaken the linking hypothesis. Let F and G be the boundary
components of a paper cylinder Ω. Our ﬁrst proof works under the hypothesis
that, for every linear projection L, the two curves L(F) and L(G) intersect.
Our second proof works under the hypothesis that F intersects the convex
hull of G. The linking hypothesis implies each of these other hypotheses.
1.3
Limiting Behavior
As we prove below, an embedded twisted paper cylinder of aspect ratio nearly
2 must approximate a 4-fold wrapping of a right isosceles triangle. There are
essentially four distinct ways to produce such a wrapping. Two are shown in
Figure 1.1, and the other two are their mirror images. In all four cases the
ﬁnal result, shown at right, approximates a right isosceles triangle, and the
boundary components form a Hopf link.
1
1
4
2
3
1
2
4
3
Figure 1.1: Two folding patterns and the result of folding them
The front sides of the rectangles in Figure 1.1 are divided into 4 right
isosceles triangles and marked 1, 2, 3, 4. The back sides (which are not shown)
are unmarked. We assume that the aspect ratio is slightly greater than 2, so
3


that the “segments” between the triangles have a tiny bit of thickness, the
folds are more like tight smooth U-turns, and the triangles do not end up
in the same plane after folding. The edges marked with arrows should be
taped together. The paper rectangle should be folded down along the solid
segments (so that the marked side of the paper ends up outside the crease)
and up along the dotted segments. In both case, the faces end up stacked
on top of each other. If you were to poke the stack with a needle you would
puncture the faces in the order 1, 2, 3, 4. Within the stack, the white triangles
face up and the grey triangles face down.
There are other ways to fold up the rectangle to obtain a right isosceles
triangle, but, except for the folding patterns above and their mirror images,
the construction would fail to produce an embedded twisted paper cylinder.
Either it would be impossible to tape the edges without self-intersection, in
violation of the embedding condition, or the boundary components would
fail to be linked.
If the aspect ratio is exactly 2, all four folding patterns degenerate into the
same continuous and piecewise isometric map from the cylinder to a right
isosceles triangle. We call this map the right-isosceles cylinder map. The
image of the right-isosceles cylinder map, as a set, is just a right isosceles
triangle in space. However, if we “remember” the folding pattern we could
describe the ﬁnal image as a folded ribbon knot. We show that the right-
isosceles cylinder map is the only possible limit of a sequence of aspect-ratio
minimizing embedded twisted paper cylinders.
Theorem 1.2 Suppose In : Γλn →R3 is a sequence of embedded twisted
paper cylinders such that λn →2. Then In converges uniformly, up to isome-
tries, to the right-isosceles cylinder map.
Corresponding to our two proofs of Theorem 1.1, we give two proofs of
Theorem 1.2. Our two proofs of Theorem 1.2 are fairly similar to each other
and indeed have the same endgame.
To show that Theorem 1.2 is not an empty statement, we prove that the
construction illustrated in Figure 1.1 really does produce (smooth) embedded
twisted paper cylinders.
Theorem 1.3 For any ǫ > 0 there exists an embedded twisted paper cylinder
of aspect ratio 2 + ǫ whose boundary components form a Hopf link.
4


The proof of Theorem 1.3 is similar in spirit to what is done in [HW]. This
is just a rigorous working-out of the description that we gave of the folding
process illustrated by Figure 1.1.
1.4
Organization
This paper is organized as follows. In §2, we give the ﬁrst proof of Theorems
1.1 and 1.2. In §3, we give the second proof. In §4, we prove Theorem 1.3.
In §5, an appendix, we prove Lemma 2.1, a key ingredient in the proofs.
1.5
Acknowledgements
R.E.S. would like to thank Brienne Brown, Elizabeth Denne, Eliot Fried,
Jeremy Kahn, Curtis McMullen, and Sergei Tabachnikov for conversations
related to this paper. R.E.S. also thanks the National Science Foundation
and the Simons Foundation for their support.
2
The First Proof
2.1
The Bend Partition
Let Ω= I(Γλ) be an embedded twisted paper cylinder. A bend on Ωis a
straight line segment having one endpoint in each boundary component of
Ω. In an appendix we establish the following classic result.
Lemma 2.1 Ωhas a continuous partition into bends.
One property we will frequently use is that bends have length at least 1.
The preimage of a bend on Ω, which we call a prebend, is a line segment
that has one endpoint in each component of ∂Γλ.
2.2
Proof of Theorem 1.1
Throughout the proof, ℓ(·) denotes arc length. A pair (u, v) of distinct bends
on Ωpartitions ∂Ωinto 4 arcs, 2 per component. We call (u, v) a balanced
pair if these 4 arcs all have the same length.
The following result is an
analogue of Lemma T in [S1], but easier to prove.
Lemma 2.2 Ωhas a balanced pair of bends.
5


Proof: We identify the midline ([0, λ] × {1/2})/ ∼of Γλ with R/λZ. We
parametrize the bends by where the corresponding prebends intersect this
midline. Thus βt denotes the bend such that the prebend β′
t intersects R/λZ
at t ∈R/λZ. Let s(t) be the slope of β′
t. Let f(t) = s(t) −s(t + λ/2). By
construction f(t + λ/2) = −f(t). Hence, by the intermediate value theorem,
there is some t such that f(t) = 0. But then s(t) = s(t + λ/2) and so βt and
βt+λ/2 do the job. ♠
Lemma 2.3 Let A, B ⊂R2 be two segments with ℓ(A), ℓ(B) ≥1. Let A1, A2
be the endpoints of A and let B1, B2 be the endpoints of B. Let Cj be an arc
that connects Aj to Bj. If C1 ∩C2 ̸= ∅then ℓ(C1) + ℓ(C2) ≥2.
Proof: Figure 2.1 shows several possibilities for A and B; the proof is the
same in all cases.
x
C1,A
C2,B
C2,A
C1,B
B
A
x
A
B
C1,A
C1,B
C2,B
B1
B1
A2
A1
A1
A2
B2
B2
Figure 2.1: The relevant sets in Lemma 2.3
A point x ∈C1 ∩C2 divides Cj into paths Cj,A and Cj,B. We have
ℓ(C1)+ℓ(C2) = ℓ(C1,A)+ℓ(C2,A)+ℓ(C1,B)+ℓ(C2,B) ≥ℓ(A)+ℓ(B) ≥2. (3)
This completes the proof. ♠
Let (u, v) be a balanced pair of bends. We identify R2 with a plane in
R3. We move by an isometry so that u ⊂R2 and v lies in a plane parallel
to R2. Let Π be the projection from R3 into R2. Let A = Π(u) = u and
B = Π(v). Note that ℓ(A) = ℓ(u) ≥1 and ℓ(B) = ℓ(v) ≥1. Let F and G be
the two boundary components of Ω. Since these curves are linked, the sets
Π(F) and Π(G) intersect. In particular there are arcs F ∗⊂F and G∗⊂G,
6


each joining an endpoint of u to an endpoint of v, such that C1 = Π(F ∗) and
C2 = Π(G∗) intersect. The balance condition and Lemma 2.3 together give:
λ = ℓ(F ∗) + ℓ(G∗) ≥ℓ(C1) + ℓ(C2) ≥2.
(4)
The set of achievable aspect ratios for smooth embedded paper cylinders is
open, because we can take any example and fatten it a bit. Hence λ > 2.
2.3
Proof of Theorem 1.2
Rather than work with a sequence In : Γλn →R3 with λn →2, we will work
with a single embedded twisted paper cylinder of aspect ratio λ = 2 + ǫ and
examine what happens as ǫ →0. To save words, we use “nearly” to mean
“up to an error that tends to zero as ǫ →0” and the symbol ≈to mean
“nearly equal”. Whenever we say two embeddings of curves or surfaces are
nearly equal, we mean with respect to the uniform metric on maps. Thus,
our goal is to show that I : Γλ →R3 is nearly the right-isosceles cylinder
map.
We retain the notation from the preceding subsection.
Since ℓ(F ∗) = ℓ(G∗) = λ/2 ≈1 and ℓ(F ∗) ≥ℓ(C1) and ℓ(G∗) ≥ℓ(C2),
we see from (4) that ℓ(F ∗) ≈ℓ(C1) and ℓ(G∗) ≈ℓ(C2). Since F ∗= Π(C1)
and since A1 is an endpoint of both F ∗and C1, we have F ∗≈C1. Likewise
G∗≈C2. Also u = A = Π(u) and v ≈B = Π(v).
Since λ ≈2, all the inequalities in (3) are nearly equalities. In particular
ℓ(A) ≈ℓ(C1,A) + ℓ(C2,A). Hence x nearly lies in A. Likewise x nearly lies in
B. Since ℓ(F ∗) + ℓ(G∗) ≈2 ≈ℓ(A) + ℓ(B), we see that F ∗and G∗nearly
agree with the bigonal paths A1, x, B1 and A2, x, B2, respectively.
Let β be a bend whose endpoint in F ∗is nearly x. The endpoint y of β in
G has distance nearly at least 1 from x. Since G is a loop of length nearly 2
which contains y and nearly contains x, we see that G is nearly a unit length
bigon having x as an endpoint. Likewise, F is nearly a unit length bigon
having x as an endpoint. Comparing these descriptions of F and G with
those of their respective subarcs F ∗and G∗we see that either x ≈A1 ≈B2
or x ≈A2 ≈B1 or A and B nearly overlap on a segment whose length
is not nearly zero. The last case is impossible because we have just shown
that any point nearly in A and B is nearly a common endpoint of F and
G. So we can assume without loss of generality that x ≈A2 ≈B1. Then F
and G respectively are nearly the bigons connecting the endpoints of u and v.
7


The Endgame: We specially highlight this part of the proof because it
is also the endgame for our second proof of Theorem 1.2.
a'
b'
a'
c'
d'
c'
u'
v'
u
v
a
d
u'
b  c  x
Figure 2.2: The prebends and bends and their endpoints
Since u and v have length nearly 1, the corresponding prebends u′ and v′
are nearly perpendicular to ∂Γλ as shown in Figure 2.2. We label the ends
of the prebends and bends as in Figure 2.2. Since ℓ(F) ≈2 and each of the
two arcs of F connecting a to b has length nearly 1, each of these two arcs
has length nearly 1. Thus u′ and v′ nearly divide Γλ into two unit squares.
Remark: We have refrained from using the fact that (u, v) is a balanced
pair, which would shorten the argument in the previous paragraph, because
we will not have this situation when we give our second proof of Theorem 1.2.
Lemma 2.4 The angle θ between the vectors a −c and d −b is nearly π/2.
Proof: We use the symbol s ≲t to mean that max(0, s −t) ≈0.
Since I preserves arc lengths and ∥a′ −d′∥≈
√
2 we have ∥a −d∥≲
√
2.
This combines with b ≈c to show that θ ≲π/2.
Let V be the ball with v as a diameter. For any positive r ≤1 we can
ﬁnd a point p ∈F such that ∥c −p∥≈r. Now p is the endpoint of a bend
whose other endpoint q lies in G. But V has diameter nearly 1 and contains
q. Hence p nearly lies outside V . This is equivalent to cos(θ) ≲r. Since this
is true for all r ∈(0, 1) we have π/2 ≲θ. ♠
Consider the four triangles into which Γλ is divided in Figure 2.2. By
Lemma 2.4 and the fact that ℓ(u) and ℓ(v) are nearly 1, the embedding I is
nearly a linear isometry on the boundary of each of these triangles. Hence I
must nearly be a linear isometry when restricted to each solid triangle. We
now can conclude that I is nearly the right-isosceles cylinder map.
8


3
The Second Proof
3.1
Proof of Theorem 1.1
Our second proof of Theorem 1.1 also relies on Lemma 2.1 and the terminol-
ogy established in §2.1.
For any subset S ⊂Rn we let Hull(S) denote the convex hull of S, i.e.
the intersection of all convex sets containing S. We will only be working with
n = 3, but the following well-known lemma works in general.
Lemma 3.1 A subset S ⊂Rn has the same diameter as its convex hull.
Proof: Let H = Hull(S). Since S ⊂H, we have diam(S) ≤diam(H).
To show diam(S) ≥diam(H) it suﬃces to prove that for all p ̸= q ∈H
there exist p′, q′ ∈S with ∥p′ −q′∥≥∥p −q∥. Let P and Q be the disjoint
closed halfspaces bounded by hyperplanes perpendicular to the line pq and
respectively containing p and q.
p
q
P
Q
Figure 3.1: The points p, q and the halfspaces P, Q
If S ∩P = ∅then Rn −P is a convex subset that contains S. This forces
H ⊂Rn −P, contradicting p ∈P ∩H. Hence there exists p′ ∈S ∩P.
Likewise there exists q′ ∈S ∩Q. By construction ∥p′ −q′∥≥∥p −q∥. ♠
Let F and G be the two boundary components of Ω. Let H = Hull(G).
Lemma 3.2 F intersects H.
Proof: Assume F ∩H = ∅. Choose some p ∈H. For r ≥1 let Dr denote di-
lation by a factor of r about p. Let Fr = Dr(F). Note that G ⊂H ⊂Dr(H)
and Fr ∩Dr(H) = ∅. Hence Fr ∩G = ∅. For large r, the loop Fr lies outside
a sphere that strictly contains G, and so Fr and G make a split link. Since
9


r 7→Fr is a smooth isotopy in the complement of G, we see that F and G
make a split link. This is a contradiction. ♠
Let x ∈F ∩H.
The point x is the endpoint of a bend whose other
endpoint y lies in G ⊂H. Bends have length at least 1, so we have just
produced two points x, y ∈H whose distance is at least 1. This means that
diam(H) ≥1. But, by Lemma 3.1, we have diam(G) = diam(H). Hence
diam(G) ≥1. Since G is a loop, this means that G has length at least 2.
The length of G is λ, so we see that λ ≥2. The case λ = 2 is impossible by
the same fattening argument used in the ﬁrst proof of Theorem 1.1.
3.2
Proof of Theorem 1.2
As in the ﬁrst proof of Theorem 1.2, let λ = 2 + ǫ. Convergence will again
be handled by using “nearly” and ≈in the sense deﬁned in §2.3.
We retain the notation from the preceding subsection.
Let v be the bend whose endpoints are x and y. Let P be the plane
through x and perpendicular to v. Let Z be the halfspace bounded by P
which does not contain y. Since x ∈H there must be some point z ∈G ∩Z.
Since ∥y −x∥≥1 we have ∥y −z∥≥1. The loop G has length nearly 2 and
G contains both y and z. Hence G is nearly the bigon whose vertices are y
and z. Moreover ∥y−x∥≈∥y−z∥≈1. If follows that z and x are nearly the
same point. There is also a bend u whose endpoints are z and some w ∈F.
A similar argument shows that F must nearly be the bigon with vertices w
and z and that ∥w −x∥≈∥w −z∥≈1.
To summarize, we have shown that F and G are both nearly unit length
bigons which nearly have x as an endpoint. Moreover, we have shown that
F and G nearly connect the endpoints of bends u and v, respectively. From
here, the proof has the same endgame as in §2.3.
4
Proof of Theorem 1.3
Using smooth bump functions we make a U-shaped curve U which agrees with
parallel line segments at either end and joins them in the middle. The product
U × [a, b] is an isometrically embedded rectangle called a pseudofold. Now
we simply follow the instructions for building one of the models depicted in
10


Figure 1.1, using pseudofolds to smoothly interpolate between the triangular
pieces. Compare [HW].
The new object will be an embedded smooth twisted cylinder whose
boundary is not quite totally geodesic. Figure 4.1 shows schematically what
this looks like. Now just trim oﬀthe rough edges. This gives you a smooth
embedded twisted paper cylinder with slightly larger λ. With this procedure
you can make λ as close to 2 as you like. You can check that the boundaries
make a Hopf link with paper models. (We recommend taping string loops
along the boundary and then pulling them free.)
Figure 4.1: Perturbing the limiting model
5
Appendix: The Bend Partition
Let I : Γλ →R3 be an embedded twisted paper cylinder and let Ω= I(Γλ).
Recall that a bend is a straight line segment on Ωhaving one endpoint in
each component of ∂Ω. In this appendix we prove Lemma 2.1, which says
that Ωhas a continuous partition into bends.
Lemma 2.1 is closely related to results in classical diﬀerential geometry,
which say that developable surfaces are ruled by straight lines.
Classical
treatments tend not to address certain subtleties covered by Lemma 2.1,
such as the presence of a boundary and the potential existence of parts of
the surface with zero mean curvature. This is all discussed in [Spi, Chapter
5, pp. 235–247].
The analogue of Lemma 2.1 is proved e.g. in [S1] for the case of Moebius
bands and used implicitly in [HW]. The proof here is essentially the same.
11


Let U ⊂Ωdenote the nonempty subset where Ωhas nonzero mean curvature.
The following result has many proofs in the literature. One modern treatment
is given in [Spi, Corollary 6, p. 241].
Lemma 5.1 U has a partition into bends.
Now we derive Lemma 2.1 from Lemma 5.1. The bends of U vary con-
tinuously because they are disjoint and all have length at least 1. Hence
the partition of U by bends extends to give a continuous partition of the
closure U by bends. The complementary regions of Ω−U are each ﬂat open
trapezoids. Two opposite parallel sides of each trapezoid τ lies in ∂Ω, and
the other two sides are bends of U −U. These bends can be continuously
extended to a bend partition of τ. Doing this for all such τ we extend the
bend partition of U to a bend partition of Ω.
Remark: In case I is an immersion, Lemma 2.1 would say that Γλ has
a partition into prebends. The proof is the same. We let U′ ⊂Γλ be the
open set of points whose images are points of nonzero curvature. Using the
same local results we get partition of U′ into prebends, and then we ﬁll in
the complementary trapezoids with prebends.
6
References
[BrS] B. E. Brown and R. E. Schwartz, The crisscross and the cup: Two
short 3-twist paper Moebius bands, preprint 2023, arXiv:2310.10000
[D] E. Denne, Folded Ribbon Knots in the Plane, The Encyclopedia of Knot
Theory (ed. Colin Adams, Erica Flapan, Allison Henrich, Louis H. Kauﬀ-
man, Lewis D. Ludwig, Sam Nelson) Chapter 88, CRC Press (2021)
[DL] E. Denne, T. Larsen, Linking number and folded ribbon unknots, Jour-
nal of Knot Theory and Its Ramiﬁcations, Vol. 32 No. 1 (2023)
[H] A. Hennessey, Constructing many-twist M¨obius bands with small aspect
ratios. arXiv:2401:14639, to appear in Comptes Rendus
[HW] B. Halpern and C. Weaver, Inverting a cylinder through isometric
immersions and embeddings, Trans. Am. Math. Soc 230, pp 41–70 (1977)
12


[S1] R. E. Schwartz, The optimal paper Moebius Band, Annals of Mathemat-
ics Vol. 201.1 (2025)
[S2] R. E. Schwartz, On nearly optimal paper Moebius Band, Advances in
Geometry (2025) to appear
[Spi] M. Spivak, A Comprehensive Introduction to Diﬀerential Geometry,
Vol 3, Third Edition, Publish or Perish (1999)
13
