Journal of Elasticity manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Translation of Michael Sadowsky’s paper “An elementary
proof for the existence of a developable M ¨OBIUS band and
the attribution of the geometric problem to a variational
problem”⋆
Denis F. Hinz · Eliot Fried
Received: date / Accepted: date
Abstract This article is a translation of Michael Sadowsky’s original paper “Ein ele-
mentarer Beweis f¨ur die Existenz eines abwickelbaren M ¨OBIUSschen Bandes und die
Zur¨uckf¨uhrung des geometrischen Problems auf ein Variationsproblem.” which ap-
peared in Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, physikal-
isch-mathematische Klasse, 17. Juli 1930. — Mitteilung vom 26. Juni, 412–415. Pub-
lished on September 12, 1930.
Keywords M¨obius band · Energy functional · Bending energy
Translation of the original paper
M ¨OBIUS [1] illustrated the band bearing his name by describing how one may be
constructed by bending a rectangular sheet of paper. Subsequently, it has been asked
whether this construction can be achieved solely as a consequence of the compliance
of the sheet in bending or whether stretching is also required. In other words — the
question has been raised as to whether the M ¨OBIUS band is developable in the strict
sense.
M ¨OBIUS himself did not address this question, since it was irrelevant for his
purposes. The developability of his band has been challenged by many, including,
⋆Citations of this translation should refer also to Sadowsky’s original paper, as cited in the Abstract.
Denis F. Hinz
Mathematical Soft Matter Unit
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology
Okinawa, Japan 904-0495
E-mail: dfhinz@gmail.com
Eliot Fried
Mathematical Soft Matter Unit
Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology,
Okinawa, Japan 904-0495
E-mail: eliot.fried@oist.jp
arXiv:1408.3034v2  [math.HO]  31 Aug 2014


2
Denis F. Hinz, Eliot Fried
Fig. 1 Adaptation of Figure 1 from the original version of the paper.
it is rumored, H. A. SCHWARZ. In the present work, the existence of a developable
band is established on elementary geometric grounds.
Imagine an elongated rectangle of ﬂexible but completely inextensible paper. Fur-
ther, imagine a rigid cylindrical rod with circular cross-section. Construct two parallel
planes tangent to the rod. A bendable but inextensible paper strip may then be posi-
tioned to lie within one of these planes, wrap halfway around the rod, and lie within
the remaining plane. See Figure 1 for a depiction of the described arrangement.
Consider now three cylindrical rods with circular cross-sections, one of which
has diameter equal to the sum of the diameters of the remaining two. The rectangular
strip of paper may then be threaded between the rods to form a M ¨OBIUS band. The
resulting surface consists of three planar sections and three semicylindrical sections
and, thus, is developable. An illustration of the construction for rods of diameters d,
d, and 2d is provided in Figure 2. The elementary connections between the particular
angles and lengths needed to form such a band are not of interest here, since only the
existence of the band matters.
The foregoing descriptive construction of a developable M ¨OBIUS band admits an
equivalent analytical construction. If attention is restricted to the previously consid-
ered simple case in which the diameters of the rods are d, d, and 2d, the projections
onto the drawing plane of the midlines of the rectangular portions of the band lie on
the edges of an equilateral triangle with side length L, and the axes of all three rods
are parallel to the drawing plane. Let A, B, C, D, E, and F be points on the midline
of the M ¨OBIUS band and let A′, B′, C′, D′, E′, and F′ be their projections onto the
drawing plane. Let AB, BC, etc. denote the distances measured along the mid-line
from point A to B, B to C, etc. and let A′B′, B′C′, etc. denote the lengths of the recti-
linear connections between A′ and B′, B′ to C′, etc. in the drawing plane. Whereas the
sections AF, BC, and DE of the midline remain rectilinear, the sections AB, CD, and
EF are twisted along helical curves. These helical curves intersect the generators of


An elementary proof for the existence of a developable M ¨OBIUS band
3
the cylinder with an angle of 60◦, from which it follows that (Figure 2)
A′B′ = ABcos(60◦),
ABcos(30◦) = 1
2π2d = πd,
etc.,
AB = 2πd
√
3 ,
A′B′ = πd
√
3,
FE = CD = πd
√
3,
F′E′ = C′D′ = πd
2
√
3,
PQ = QR = PR = L,
AF = BC = L−
√
3πd
2
,
ED = L−πd
√
3.
(1)
Moreover, the total length l of the midline obeys l = 3L.
Hereafter, l and d may be chosen arbitrarily (the latter within certain limits,
cf. (2)) and, based on the computations above, the points A to F may be chosen
to lie on the mid-line. These points also must be in the order A-B-C-D-E-F, which
is the case for 3
√
3πd ≤2l (cf. (1)). Next, the generators of the cylindrically twisted
parts can be marked on the band with an angle of 60◦(Figure 3). The maximal band
width 2b corresponding to one pair (l,d) of values in the construction is determined
through the generators, because the portions of the band, which are wound around
different cylinders may not overlap — at most they may come into contact at the
boundary of the band. Since BC = AF are the shortest of the unbent portions of the
band, it follows that (Figure 3)
b ≤BC
2 tan(60o),
i.e.
b ≤
l
2
√
3 −3πd
4 .
These inequalities identify the constraint
d ≤
2l
3
√
3π .
(2)
For an inﬁnitely narrow (b = 0) M ¨OBIUS band, we may set
BC = AF = 0.
For such a band we also have
AB = 4
9l,
FE = CD = 2
9l,
DE = 1
9l,
and (cf. the following considerations)
l
Z
0
H2ds = 15π2
l
(3)


4
Denis F. Hinz, Eliot Fried
P
A′
B′
2d
60◦
C′
R
D′
E′
Q
F′
d
d
Fig. 2 Adaptation of Figure 2 from the original version of the paper.
as an upper bound for the integral of the general variational problem (4) for a band
that is inﬁnitesimally narrow with respect to its length.
The existence of a developable M ¨OBIUS band is therefore established by con-
struction. Consider, in more detail, the shape of the band so obtained: The band is
assembled from pieces of individual ﬂat and cylindrical surfaces; the actual band
constructed with a piece of paper has a different smoothly curved shape. We may
arrive at this form if we take into account that the band constructed out of planes and
cylinder surface pieces may remain in equilibrium only under the inﬂuence of bound-
ary and surface forces, respectively, along with moments. This follows, for example,
on recognizing that the curvature of the band as constructed is discontinuous, and,
moreover, that moments, as is well known, are associated with curvature. However, if
freed from the inﬂuence of these forces the constructed band will deform and ﬁnd an
equilibrium conﬁguration corresponding to a minimum of the internal energy associ-
ated with elastic deformation. The elastic bending energy density is proportional to
the surface integral of the squared mean curvature, granted that the surface is devel-
opable. For the situation under consideration, the following observation holds: As ini-
tial shape we had a strictly developable band. Corresponding to the provision that the
band is inextensible, the deformation is a pure deﬂection — without stretching. We
thus conclude that any conﬁguration resulting from such deformation must be strictly
developable. In general, the shape of a the M ¨OBIUS band corresponds to a minimum


An elementary proof for the existence of a developable M ¨OBIUS band
5
A
B
C
D 60◦
E
F
A
l
2bmax
Fig. 3 Adaptation of Figure 3 from the original version of the paper.
of the bending energy. The determination of this ideal form is thus attributed to the
variational problem
ZZ
H2dF = Min,
(4)
the integration being over the complete surface, where H is the mean curvature of
the surface and the following conditions apply: the strip forming the band surface
has rectangular shape and the band is both developable and possesses the proper one-
sided spatial connectivity.
For a inﬁnitely narrow band, that is a band with width b inﬁnitesimally small
compared to its length l, the variational problem (4) reduces to
l
Z
0
(K2 +W 2)2
K2
ds = Min,
(5)
where K and W are the curvature and the torsion, respectively, of the mid-line of the
band, and s is its arc length. For a further exact treatment of the problem, it seems
that (5) is practically inappropriate, since the calculation becomes exceedingly com-
plicated.
Addendum during the review: For further determination of the conﬁguration of
the band cf. the work of the author in the reports of the 3rd International Congress for
Technical Mechanics (3. internationaler Kongress f. techn. Mechanik), Stockholm
1930.
References
1. A. F. M¨obius, Ges. Werke Bd. 2 or Leipziger Berichte ¨Uber die Bestimmung des Inhaltes eines Polyed-
ers, 484–485 (1865)
