arXiv:1501.03238v2  [math.CO]  22 Jun 2017
VALID PLANE TREES: COMBINATORIAL MODELS FOR RNA SECONDARY
STRUCTURES WITH WATSON-CRICK BASE PAIRS
FRANCIS BLACK, ELIZABETH DRELLICH *, AND JULIANNA TYMOCZKO**
Abstract. The combinatorics of RNA plays a central role in biology. Mathematical biologists have sev-
eral commonly-used models for RNA: words in a ﬁxed alphabet (representing the primary sequence of
nucleotides) and plane trees (representing the secondary structure, or folding of the RNA sequence). This
paper considers an augmented version of the standard model of plane trees, one that incorporates some
observed constraints on how the folding can occur. In particular we assume the alphabet consists of com-
plementary pairs, for instance the Watson-Crick pairs A-U and C-G of RNA.
Given a word in the alphabet, a valid plane tree is a tree for which, when the word is folded around
the tree, each edge matches two complementary letters. Consider the graph whose vertices are valid plane
trees for a ﬁxed word and whose edges are given by Condon, Heitsch, and Hoos’s local moves. We prove
this graph is connected.
We give an explicit algorithm to construct a valid plane tree from a primary sequence, assuming that
at least one valid plane tree exists. The tree produced by our algorithm has other useful characterizations,
including a uniqueness condition deﬁned by local moves. We also study enumerative properties of valid
plane trees, analyzing how the number of valid plane trees depends on the choice of sequence length and
alphabet size. Finally we show that the proportion of words with at least one valid plane tree goes to zero
as the word size increases. We also give some open questions.
1. Introduction
DNA has as its core a fundamental combinatorial object: words in a ﬁnite sequence, on which permutations
act, with biologically signiﬁcant output. Until fairly recently RNA was considered a mute cousin of DNA,
important primarily as a stepping stone. Unlike the famous double helix, it has a single strand. Because
this strand has many nucleotides, it tends to fold onto itself like a too-long piece of tape. The base pairs
created by this folding deﬁne its secondary structure. And it turns out that these secondary structures
(and the tertiary structures—namely the embedding of the secondary structure into 3-dimensional space)
determine the functional aspects of RNA, for instance whether RNA transcribes and interprets the code in
DNA, builds proteins, sends messages, or even even rewrites genetic code.
In this paper we study a combinatorial model for RNA secondary structures consisting of plane trees,
which are rooted planar trees whose half-edges are ordered counterclockwise from the root, like those shown
in Figure 1. The plane tree model is well-established [5, 10, 7] and plane trees are conveniently one of
the many sets of objects enumerated by the Catalan numbers [1, 9]. Though other sets enumerated by
Catalan numbers–including non-crossing matchings and balanced parentheses–are also used by mathematical
biologists to model RNA secondary structures, plane trees have the advantage of depicting a simpliﬁed shape
of the observed RNA secondary structure.
However the standard plane tree model does not incorporate information about base pairs. In this paper
we assume an alphabet consisting of pairs of complementary letters and add the constraint that a letter can
only pair with its complement. For instance we might take the alphabet to consist of the four nucleotides
{A, C, G, U} and the complementary pairs to be the Watson-Crick complements A-U and C-G. Or we
might take the alphabet to consist of codons, each of which is a sequence of three nucleotides corresponding
to an amino acid, and require that codons only bond with their perfect Watson-Crick complements.
*Partially supported by NSF grant DMS–1248171 and NSF grant DMS–1143716.
**Partially supported by NSF grant DMS–1248171.
1


2
Black, Drellich, and Tymoczko
2
3
1
4
1
2
3
4
Figure 1. The two plane trees with two edges
A primary structure P is a word in our alphabet. Given a primary structure P, a plane tree S is called
P-valid if folding P into the shape S leaves every letter in P matched with its complement (see Deﬁnition
2.4). Condon, Heitsch, and Hoos deﬁned operations on the set of plane trees called local moves, which
“unzip” two adjacent edges and “rezip” them in another arrangement (see Deﬁnition 2.2). We reﬁne this
to consider valid local moves, which require both initial and ﬁnal plane tree to be valid plane trees.
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
Figure 2. Only the plane tree on the right is valid for P = BBBB.
Our basic problem has non-biological antecedents, as well. When the alphabet has exactly one complemen-
tary pair, the number of P-valid plane trees has a classical combinatorial interpretation as the number of
“polite” dinner party conversations between knights and ladies of the Round Table (where “polite” encodes
the notion of a noncrossing matching), as well as more serious mathematical applications to free probability
theory and random matrix theory. Kemp, Mahlburg, Rattan, and Smyth ﬁrst studied this problem explic-
itly, giving partial results to enumerate and bound the set of P-valid plane trees for an alphabet with one
complementary pair [8]. Schumacher and Yan computed elegant formulas for the number of P-valid plane
trees for speciﬁc families of sequences [11].
We answer a collection of questions about primary sequences P and their P-valid plane trees. The ﬁrst set
assume we are given a primary structure and ask about the possible secondary structures:
• Can we determine if a valid plane tree for P exists, and if so ﬁnd it? (Yes, by a greedy algorithm
described in Deﬁnition 3.2.)
• Given a primary sequence P with at least one valid plane tree, how many orbits does it have under
the action of valid local moves? (Just one, by Theorem 3.7.)
• Valid local moves of type 2 are a kind of collapsing operation on valid plane trees, deﬁned in
Deﬁnition 2.2. They allow us to create a directed graph whose vertices are the valid plane trees;
for instance, there is a local move of type 2 from left to right in the plane trees in Figure 1. On
which valid plane trees can a valid local move of type 2 be performed? (On all trees except the tree
produced by the greedy algorithm; see Corollaries 3.6 and 3.8.)
The second set of questions asks about the possible primary sequences that satisfy various constraints:
• How many sequences of length 2n have exactly k valid plane trees? (See results in Section 4, including
Remark 4.2 and Proposition 4.3, which say none if k > Cn or if Cn−1 < k < Cn respectively. Also
see recent work of Wagner [12].)
• How does the collection of valid plane trees depend on the choice of sequence length 2n and alphabet
size 2m? (See Section 4 for a preliminary study.)
• How many sequences P have a valid plane tree? (Relatively few—Theorem 5.3 shows that the ratio
of sequences with a valid plane tree to all sequences approaches zero as sequence length increases.)


Valid Plane Trees
3
2. Valid plane trees and valid local moves
A plane tree is a rooted tree for which the children of each vertex are ordered. When we draw plane trees,
we depict the order by arranging the children left-to-right. For example these two trees are diﬀerent plane
trees:
We label the half-edges of a plane tree of size n with the numbers 1 through 2n starting on the left side
of the leftmost edge adjacent to the root, and walking around the tree counter-clockwise. The edges of the
tree are called e(i, j) where i and j are the labels on the left and right sides of the edge, respectively. For
example this tree contains the edges e(1, 2), e(3, 6) and e(4, 5):
1
2
5
4
6
3
In the classical plane tree model of RNA-folding, the sequence of labels on the half-edges corresponds to the
primary structure. The plane tree model as presented by Condon, Heitsch, and Hoos assumed that each
half-edge corresponded to a string of six Gs or six Cs, all of which are paired [6, see Section 4]. Hairpin
loops, bulges, and other unmatched biological structures are omitted in the graph. (In fact RNA secondary
structure always contains unpaired nucleotides since a hairpin loop with at least three unpaired nucleotides
is needed for any pairs to bond at all.)
Plane trees are also important combinatorial objects. We note three classical properties that are useful in
proofs.
Proposition 2.1. Properties of plane trees:
(1) (Non-crossing condition) No edges e(i, j) and e(i′, j′) have i < i′ < j < j′.
(2) For each edge e(i, j) the half-edges labeled {i+1, i+2, . . ., j −1} form a subtree, as do the half-edges
labeled {1, 2, . . ., i −1, j + 1, j + 2, . . . , n}.
(3) For each edge e(i, j) the half-edges i and j are of opposite parity.
Proof. The non-crossing condition follows from the construction of plane trees [2, Section 4.4.2]. The second
property follows from the non-crossing condition and the third property follows from the second.
□
Condon, Heitsch, and Hoos deﬁned local moves to be the following operation on pairs of edges in a plane
tree, which corresponds to an unfolding-and-refolding operation on nearby base pairs in a strand of RNA
[6, Deﬁnition 8].
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let i < j < i′ < j′ and ﬁx a plane tree S. The two local moves are
• type 1: if e(i, j) and e(i′, j′) are adjacent edges in S then e(i, j), e(i′, j′) are replaced by e(i, j′),
e(j, i′).
• type 2: if e(i, j′) and e(j, i′) are adjacent edges in S then e(i, j′), e(j, i′) are replaced by e(i, j),
e(i′, j′).
A local move results in a new plane tree S′.
Figure 3 shows the local moves. Note that local moves can be performed on edges without any successively-
labeled half-edges, namely with i < j −1 and j < i′ −1 and i′ < j′ −1. In other words there can be many


4
Black, Drellich, and Tymoczko
other edges incident to the vertices in Figure 3, including edges that come between the edges sketched in
the schematic.
i
j
i′
j′
type 1 move
type 2 move
j
i′
i
j′
Figure 3. Local moves
We deﬁne plane trees for sequences other than the sequence that Condon, Heitsch, and Hoos used. We are
motivated by the example of RNA but an arbitrary alphabet consisting of complementary pairs is more
mathematically natural.
Deﬁnition 2.3. A set A is a complementary alphabet if for every letter B ∈A there is a unique complement
B ∈A that is distinct from B. If A is a complementary alphabet then taking the complement is an involution
on A with B = B for each B ∈A.
Though the collection of nucleotides {A, C, G, U} is our foundational example, it is in fact not a comple-
mentary alphabet. The Watson-Crick pairs C −G and A−U form the strongest and second-strongest bonds
respectively. However so-called “wobble pairs” G −U also bond in nature, though more weakly than the
others.
The next deﬁnition introduces one of the key objects in this paper: valid plane trees. Valid plane trees
improve upon the plane tree model by considering whether, using only perfect complements, a primary
structure could actually form the secondary structure of a particular plane tree.
Deﬁnition 2.4 (P-valid plane trees). Let S be a plane tree with n edges and let P = p1p2 · · · p2n be a word
in a complementary alphabet A. We say S is a P-valid plane tree if for every edge e(i, j) in S the letters pi
and pj are a complementary pair in A. We may refer to S as a valid plane tree if P is clear from context.
We denote the set of all P-valid plane trees V(P).
We only consider local moves that send P-valid plane trees to other P-valid plane trees. More precisely we
have the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.5. Fix a primary sequence P and let S be a P-valid plane tree, i.e. S ∈V(P). A valid local
move on S is a local move on S such that the resulting plane tree S′ is also in V(P).
The following two claims are immediate since local moves are invertible.
Proposition 2.6. A local move of type 1 is valid if and only if the inverse local move of type 2 is valid.
Proposition 2.7. The following conditions are necessary and suﬃcient to guarantee the existence of a valid
local move with respect to P = p1p2 · · · p2n
• There is a valid type 1 local move on adjacent edges e(i, j) and e(i′, j′) if and only if for some
B, B ∈A the letters pi = pi′ = B and pj = pj′ = B.
• There is a valid type 2 move on adjacent edges e(i, j′) and e(j, i′) if and only if for some B, B ∈A
the letters pi = pi′ = B and pj = pj′ = B.
In fact the property of being P-valid is inherited by subtrees in the following sense.
Proposition 2.8. Suppose T is a P-valid tree and that T contains an edge e(i, j) and denote by v the vertex
of e(i, j) farthest from the root.
• The subgraph T ′ induced from e(i, j) together with all descendants of v is equivalently characterized
as the subgraph containing half-edges i, i + 1, . . . , j −1, j.


Valid Plane Trees
5
Deﬁne T ′′ to be the subgraph of T obtained by erasing T ′ from T . Deﬁne P ′ to be the subsequence of P
consisting of the labels on the half-edges i, i+1, i+2, . . ., j−1, j and P ′′ to be the subsequence of P consisting
of the labels on the half-edges 1, 2, . . ., i −1, j + 1, j + 2, . . . , n retaining the original indexing for notational
convenience.
• Then T ′ is a P ′-valid tree and T ′′ is a P ′′-valid tree.
Proof. By our convention of labeling half-edges in a plane tree, the half-edges descended from v in T are
labeled i + 1, i + 2, . . . , j −1. (Figure 10 shows a schematic.) The descendants of a vertex in a rooted tree
form a subtree, so T ′ is a P ′-valid tree. The graph T ′′ is connected by construction and is formed of the
half-edges labeled 1, 2, . . . , i −1, j + 1, j + 2, . . . , n so T ′′ is a P ′′-valid tree.
□
The condition of being P-valid respects the fact that any two plane trees of size n either have some overlap
or are very close to having some overlap, as the following proposition makes precise.
Proposition 2.9. Given two trees T, T ′ ∈V(P) either T and T ′ share an edge or there exists a valid local
move on one, say from T ′ to T ′′, such that T and T ′′ share an edge.
Proof. Suppose T and T ′ have no common edges. Suppose e(i, i + 1) is a leaf of T . Since it is not a leaf in
T ′ the half-edges labeled i and i + 1 have one of the following conﬁgurations in T ′:
i + 1
k
i
j
(a) i and i + 1 on left
j
i
k
i + 1
(b) i and i + 1 on right
j
i
i + 1
k
(c) i and i + 1 on peak
Figure 4
Since e(i, i + 1) is an edge of a valid plane tree, the half-edges i and i + 1 are labeled B and B respectively
and so the half-edges j and k must be labeled B and B respectively, regardless of the conﬁguration. Each
conﬁguration has a valid local move that results in a tree T ′′ with leaf e(i, i + 1) as desired.
□
We can use valid plane trees and local moves to create a graph. Later sections will prove key properties of
the graph deﬁned in the next proposition. The proof follows immediately from earlier propositions.
Proposition 2.10. Fix a primary structure P. Let GP be the graph whose vertices are the elements of the
set V(P) with an edge between two plane trees if they are connected by a valid local move. Then GP is a
well-deﬁned undirected graph.
(a) GP for P = AAAABBBB
(b) GQ for Q = AABBAABB
Figure 5. Graphs of valid trees.


6
Black, Drellich, and Tymoczko
3. Graph of valid plane trees: Global Structure
Given a primary sequence P this section considers the overall structure of the graph GP of P-valid plane
trees.
We give an algorithm that produces a P-valid plane tree from P exactly when the set V(P) is
nonempty. The algorithm is greedy in the sense that it matches letters in P opportunistically as it reads
through the sequence. Theorem 3.7 shows that the graph GP is connected. Deﬁne a graph G+
P by directing
each edge in GP consistent with its type 2 move. Corollary 3.8 proves that G+
P has a unique sink. This
2-sink is characterized in a number of diﬀerent combinatorial ways in Corollary 3.11, including as the tree
produced by the greedy algorithm.
Remark 3.1. We streamline proofs in this section by using the well-know bijection between plane trees with
n edges and non-crossing matchings on 2n letters that sends each edge e(i, j) in the plane tree to the ordered
pair (i, j) in the matching. (The inverse of this map is obtained by writing the half-edges of a plane tree
counterclockwise from the root; in each pair (i, j) the index i corresponds to a left-half-edge and the index j
corresponds to a right half-edge.) Note that this map respects the poset under inclusion for plane trees and
noncrossing matchings, in the sense that subtrees correspond to submatchings and vice versa. The reader
interested in more is referred to [2, Section 4.4.2].
By extension of the classical bijection between plane trees and noncrossing matchings, every P-valid plane
tree S induces a perfect matching on the letters p1p2 · · · p2n = P of the word P. If pi and pj label the two
half-edges of a single edge in S then we refer to pi and pj as a pair in the matching.
We now give the algorithm, which we describe in the language of stacks.
Deﬁnition 3.2 (The greedy algorithm). Given a primary structure P = p1p2 · · · p2n perform the following.
• Push the ﬁrst letter p1.
• For each subsequent letter pi
– Peek at the stack.
– If the letter on top of the stack is the complement of pi pop it.
– If not push pi.
The greedy algorithm outputs a (possibly empty) stack and also a collection of ordered pairs
E(P) = {(i, j) : pi is popped at the jth step of the algorithm}.
From the biological perspective, RNA molecules do not wait patiently to be fully formed before starting to
fold. As they grow longer RNA molecules begin to refold into shapes that minimize free energy [4]. The
greedy algorithm models the ﬁrst folds, before the eﬀects of energy-minimization dominate.
The output of the greedy algorithm satisﬁes several properties that are reminiscent of Proposition 2.1 and
Proposition 2.8. It creates a partial matching on each input sequence P. In fact, if the algorithm terminates
with an empty stack then it created a perfect matching which is moreover a P-valid plane tree denoted
T0(P). The following lemma is the main step in our proof that the greedy algorithm always produces a
valid plane tree if any P-valid plane trees exist.
B
B
B
B
A
A
B
B
B
B
A
A
B
B
B
B
Figure 6. Both plane trees are valid for P = BBBBAABB but the one on the left is T0(P).


Valid Plane Trees
7
Lemma 3.3. Suppose that when the greedy algorithm is applied to the sequence P = p1p2 · · · p2n it pops
pi at the jth step. Let P ′ be the sequence obtained by removing the letters pipi+1pi+2 · · · pj−1pj from P
and retaining (for the sake of notational convenience) the same indexing. Then implementing the greedy
algorithm on P ′ results in the same stack as P and moreover E(P) is the disjoint union
E(P) = E(P ′)
[
M
where M is a perfect matching on the set {i,i + 1, i + 2, . . . , j −1, j}.
Proof. If pi is popped at the jth step then it must be at the top of the stack. Thus any of the letters
pi+1, pi+2, . . . , pj−1 that were pushed must also have been popped before the jth step. Since every symbol
is popped at most once, none of p1, p2, . . . , pi−1 were popped in steps i + 1, i + 2, . . . , j −1. This means
the subset of pi+1, pi+2, . . . , pj−1 that were pushed onto the stack is bijective with the number of steps in
{i + 1, i + 2, . . . , j −1} at which the stack was popped, or equivalently E(P) contains a perfect matching of
{i + 1, i + 2, . . . , j −1}. It follows that the stack at the j + 1th step on input P is the same as the stack at
the i −1th step of input P. Since these are the same as the stack at the i −1th step of P ′ and since P and
P ′ share the same 2n −j last letters, the greedy algorithm produces the same output (pairs and stack) on
P ′ as on P outside of {i,i + 1, i + 2, . . . , j −1, j}.
□
Note that i labels a left half-edge in the tree T0(P) if and only if pi was pushed onto the stack in the greedy
algorithm.
In fact if a primary structure has any valid plane tree, then the greedy algorithm will terminate with an
empty stack and thus produce a valid plane tree. The next theorem proves this claim using a proof by
minimal counterexample.
Theorem 3.4. Let P be a primary structure. If V(P) is nonempty then the greedy algorithm produces a
valid plane tree T0 ∈V(P).
Proof. If n = 1 then for all sequences of length 2n = 2 that have a valid plane tree, the greedy algorithm
produces the (unique) plane tree.
Consider the collection of primary sequences P such that a P-valid plane tree exists but the greedy algorithm
terminates with a nonempty stack. Let Q = q1q2 · · · q2k be such a sequence of shortest length, i.e. Q is a
sequence of length 2k and for all valid sequences of length 2ℓwhere ℓ< k the greedy algorithm terminates
with an empty stack.
We ﬁrst claim that the greedy algorithm pops at least once. Indeed there is at least one Q-valid plane tree
and that tree must have at least one leaf, say edge e(i, i + 1). This means that qi = qi+1 and so the greedy
algorithm pops at the i + 1th step if not before.
We use this fact to produce a shorter sequence than Q for which a valid plane tree exists but the greedy
algorithm terminates without an empty stack.
Suppose that the algorithm pops ﬁrst at the j + 1th step. Then it must have popped qj oﬀthe stack. By
Lemma 3.3 the greedy algorithm has the same stack when run on the sequence
Q′ = q1q2 · · · qj−2qj−1qj+2qj+3 · · · q2n
as on Q. If e(j, j + 1) is a leaf in one of the Q-valid plane trees T then plucking e(j, j + 1) oﬀof T results
in a Q′-valid plane tree. This would then contradict our hypothesis that Q was the minimal such sequence.
It remains to be shown that e(j, j + 1) is indeed a leaf in one of the Q-valid plane trees. Suppose not
and consider an arbitrary T ∈V(Q). Consider the edges containing the j and j + 1th half-edges. They
are adjacent edges that have complementary labels since the j + 1th step of the greedy algorithm pops qj.
By either a type 1 or type 2 move, the tree T can be transformed into a new valid plane tree T ′ in V(Q)
containing the leaf e(j, j + 1) as desired.
□
We can say more about the valid plane tree that the greedy algorithm produces.


8
Black, Drellich, and Tymoczko
Corollary 3.5. The greedy algorithm produces a valid plane tree with no valid local moves of type 2.
Proof. Consider a valid local move of type 2 in T0. This local move involves two adjacent edges e(i, j′) and
e(j, i′) in T0 such that i < j < i′ < j′. If the half-edge i has label B then the half-edges j and j′ must
both be labeled by B while half-edge i′ is labeled B. At the jth step of the greedy algorithm pi is on top of
the stack (regardless of whether there are other edges between i and j by Proposition 2.8). So pi must be
popped forming e(i, j). By contradiction we conclude T0 has no valid local moves of type 2.
□
In fact more is true: the tree T0 produced by the greedy algorithm is the only P-valid plane tree with no
valid local moves of type 2. The proof walks through the deﬁnitions, particularly using the non-crossing
condition of half-edges in plane trees.
Theorem 3.6. Suppose T is a P-valid plane tree that is not T0. Then T has a valid local move of type 2.
Proof. Consider a P-valid plane tree T that is not T0. They diﬀer in some edge, so let j denote the ﬁrst
half-edge in which they diﬀer, i.e. pj labels a left half-edge in one of T or T0 but a right half-edge in the
other. We ﬁrst show that pj must label a right half-edge in T0. If not it labels a right half-edge in T which
we call e(i′, j). The half-edges i′ + 1, . . . , j −1 form a subtree of T by Proposition 2.8. This same subtree is
in both T and T0 by hypothesis that pj is the ﬁrst label where they diﬀer. Thus pi′ is on top of the stack
at step j in the greedy algorithm and so e(i′, j) is in T0 contradicting our hypothesis.
So pj labels a right half-edge in T0 say of the edge e(i, j). Then
• i and j are both left half-edges in T by hypothesis
• that have complementary labels, say B and B respectively, because T0 is P-valid and
• the half-edges labeled i + 1, i + 2, . . . , j −1 form a subtree in T0 by Proposition 2.8 and thus in T
by hypothesis.
matches T0
left half-edges match T0
pj = B
B
pi = B
B
Figure 7. If T diﬀers from T0 then T has a type-2 local move.
This means that T looks like the schematic of Figure 7 and so admits a local move of type 2, as desired.
□
We now conclude that in fact the graph whose vertices are valid plane trees and whose edges are local moves
is connected.
Theorem 3.7. Fix a primary structure P. The graph GP is connected.


Valid Plane Trees
9
Proof. We induct on the length of the sequence P. The claim is trivial when P has 2 letters since in that
case there is a unique valid plane tree. Suppose that for every primary structure with at most 2(n −1)
letters, the graph whose vertices are valid plane trees and whose edges are local moves is connected. Fix a
primary structure P with n letters and consider two distinct P-valid plane trees S and T . If S and T share
no common edges then Proposition 2.9 asserts that there is a valid local move on one to a P-valid plane
tree sharing an edge with the other. Without loss of generality assume that S and T both contain the edge
e(i, j).
Now delete the common edge e(i, j). Create the subtrees S′ and T ′ induced from S and T respectively from
the edges farther from the root than e(i, j) (namely those indexed e(i′, j′) for i < i′, j′ < j), and create
subtrees S′′ and T ′′ respectively from the edges closer to the root than e(i, j) (namely those indexed e(i′, j′)
for i′ < i and j′ > j). By Proposition 2.8 we know S′ and T ′ are P ′-valid plane trees for the subsequence
P ′ of P consisting of the letters in positions i′ for i′ < i or i′ > j. Similarly S′′ and T ′′ are P ′′-valid plane
trees, where P ′′ is the subsequence of P consisting of the letters in positions i′ for i < i′ < j. By induction
there are valid local moves taking S′ to T ′ and S′′ to T ′′. Implement the same local moves on S to get valid
local moves that take S to T . This proves the claim.
□
Furthermore if the edges of GP are directed and correspond to type 2 local moves, then the graph has a
unique sink T0.
Corollary 3.8. Fix a primary sequence P with at least one valid plane tree and let T0 be the valid plane
tree for P produced by the greedy algorithm. Let G+
P denote the graph whose vertices are valid plane trees
for P and with a directed edge T →T ′ if there is a local move of type 2 from T to T ′.
The valid plane tree T0 is the unique sink in the directed graph G+
P .
Proof. Corollary 3.5 proved that T0 has no edges directed out so T0 is a sink in G+
P . Theorem 3.6 proved
that every other tree has at least one edge directed out so there are no other sinks in the graph G+
P .
□
Remark 3.9. The graph G+
P may have several sources. For instance the graph on the sequence AABBAABB
has two sources and one sink.
Figure 8. G+
Q for Q = AABBAABB
Corollary 3.10. The graph G+
P has no directed cycles. There is a path consisting only of type-2 valid local
moves from every valid plane tree T in G+
P to T0.
Proof. Consider the total distance from the root in a valid plane tree, deﬁned as
dT =
X
v∈T
dist(v, v0)
where v0 is the root. Figure 9 shows that dT drops by at least one with each valid local move of type 2 (and
more if the subtree labeled C in Figure 9 is non-empty).


10
Black, Drellich, and Tymoczko
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
type 2
Figure 9. A generic move of type 2
Since the total distance dT can only decrease there are no directed cycles in the graph G+
P .
Moreover Theorem 3.7 proved that the undirected graph GP is connected and hence G+
P has only one
connected component. Consider the following process: given a tree T in the graph G+
P follow any edge out
of T . Repeat until you reach a tree with no edges directed out within the graph G+
P . Since G+
P has no
directed cycles and only ﬁnite number of trees, we know this process terminates. Since T0 is the unique tree
with no edges directed out of it in G+
P we know the process terminates at T0. Thus there is a path consisting
only of type 2 valid local moves from every valid plane tree T to T0 as desired.
□
We collect all of this information concisely as follows.
Corollary 3.11. Let P be a primary sequence with at least one P-valid plane tree. The following are
equivalent.
• T0 is the unique sink in the graph G+
P .
• T0 is the plane tree produced by the greedy algorithm on P.
• For each plane tree T with root v0 deﬁne the total distance dT = P
v∈T dist(v, v0). Among the
P-valid plane trees T0 has minimum total distance.
4. Number of Valid Plane Trees: the Size of GP
A primary sequence P has two main parameters: the length of the sequence P and the size of the alphabet
from which the letters of P are drawn. The vast majority of primary sequences have no valid plane trees at
all, as we discuss in the next section. This section gives results showing how the order of GP depends on n
and m. It also includes open questions.
Some notation makes the discussion in this and later sections easier.
Notation 4.1. Given sequences of length 2n in complementary alphabets with 2m letters:
• P(n, m) is the set of valid sequences of length 2n in a complementary alphabet with 2m letters,
namely sequences P with at least one P-valid plane tree.
• N(n, m, k) is the set of valid sequences P ∈P(n, m) such that |V(P)| = k.
• R(n, m) is the set of k ∈Z such that N(n, m, k) is non-empty.
4.1. Describing N(n, m, k). We can bound the k for which N(n, m, k) is nonzero and can describe N(n, m, k)
in the boundary cases. We have the following initial observations, which are generalizations of observations
made by Kemp, Mahlburg, Rattan, and Smyth [8, Proposition 1.7].
Remark 4.2. A sequence obtains the maximum number of valid plane trees in the following circumstances:
• A primary sequence P of length 2n has at most Cn valid plane trees, where Cn is the nth Catalan
number.


Valid Plane Trees
11
• A primary sequence P has exactly Cn valid plane trees if and only if P is of the form BBBB...BB.
• Using an alphabet of size 2m there are 2m such sequences, namely |N(n, m, Cn)| = 2m.
If a sequence in P(n, m) has more than Cn−1 valid plane trees, then all Cn possible plane trees must be
valid. In other words R(n, m) has a large gap between its largest element Cn and its second largest Cn−1.
Our argument uses the recurrence relation for Catalan numbers on a sequence that is not (BB)n.
Proposition 4.3. Fix k > 0. If a sequence P of length 2n has k valid plane trees and k ̸= Cn then k is at
most Cn−1.
Proof. Let P ∈P(n, m) have exactly k valid plane trees with k < Cn. For each pi in P the half-edge i
can only be paired with j if pj = pi and j is of the opposite parity to i. Suppose P contains the letter
B in exactly ℓB > 0 odd-indexed places. Since there is at least one P-valid plane tree, there must be ℓB
even-indexed places containing the letter ¯B. In any valid tree T ∈V(P) these ℓB edges can, if adjacent,
interact via local moves and thus form at most CℓB valid subforests. This is true for any letter in A so the
set V(P) has at most k = Q
B∈A
CℓB valid trees.
Let B1 denote the letter p1. The product Ca · Cb is less than or equal to Ca+b for any a, b ≥0 by the
recurrence relation deﬁning Catalan numbers. Moreover each ℓB ≤n −1 since P ̸= (BB)n by hypothesis.
This means
k ≤
Y
B∈A
CℓB ≤CℓB1 · Cn−ℓB1
The product of Catalan numbers Ci · Cn−i is maximized when i = 1 or i = n −1. So
CℓB1 · Cn−ℓB1 ≤C1 · Cn−1 = Cn−1.
□
We can also characterize the sequences P that achieve the bound of Proposition 4.3.
Corollary 4.4. If a sequence P = p1p2 · · · p2n has exactly Cn−1 valid plane trees then
• all but one of the odd indexed pi are the same letter,
• all but one of the even indexed pi are the same letter, and
• if for i and j of opposite parity pi and pj diﬀer from the other odd and even indexed letters respec-
tively, then either
– one of i, j is 1 and the other is 2n, or
– |i −j| = 1.
Proof. By the previous proof if more than two letters in A appear as pi for i odd then |V(P)| will be strictly
less than Cn−1. If exactly two letters appear in odd-indexed positions, say A and B (possibly complements),
then there are at most CℓA · CℓB P-valid plane trees. By hypothesis there are Cn−1 total P-valid trees so
without loss of generality ℓA = n −1 and ℓB = 1. Thus all but one odd-indexed pi are A and because P is
valid, all but one even-indexed pi are A.
Let pi and pj be the odd-indexed letter that diﬀers from A and the even-indexed letter that diﬀers from A.
We assume that i < j though not that i is the odd index. Then any P-valid plane tree contains the edge
e(i, j) according to the following schematic:


12
Black, Drellich, and Tymoczko
a edges
n −a −1 edges
i
j
Figure 10. Edge e(i, j) partitions a valid plane tree into valid subtrees.
There are Ca · Cn−a−1 = Cn−1 possible P-valid plane trees so either a = 0 and e(i, j) is a leaf or a = n −1
and e(i, j) is the unique edge incident to the root, as claimed.
□
The next corollary follows immediately by counting possible locations and letters for A and B.
Corollary 4.5. There are 2m(2m −1)(2n) sequences P ∈P(n, m) with exactly Cn−1 valid plane trees, i.e.
|N(n, m, Cn−1)| = 4m(2m −1)n.
We can characterize the set N(n, 1, 1) using a similar argument.
Proposition 4.6. The set N(n, 1, 1) has size 2n.
Proof. We show that unless the primary sequence P on the alphabet {B, B} has a very special form, then
we can ﬁnd a P-valid plane tree with a valid local move. This would imply V(P) has more than one element
and thus P ̸∈N(n, 1, 1).
Suppose v is a vertex in a P-valid plane tree on the alphabet {B, B} that is incident to three edges. Then
two of the left-edges incident to v have the same label by the pigeonhole principle. Thus there is a valid
local move at the vertex v. It follows that if P has only one P-valid plane tree then that tree is a path.
The root may be anywhere on that path. To prevent local moves, all edges to the left of the root must
have the same letter on their left half-edges while edges to the right must have its complement on their left
half-edges. There are two choices for the side that has B and n choices for the location of the root. Thus
there are 2n primary sequences P with |V(P)| = 1.
□
Without loss of generality, all such sequences P must have the form P = Bk(B)nBn−k.
Heitsch and
Poznanovi´c used similar arguments to prove that if T is a plane tree in which the maximum degree of a
vertex is d, then there exists a sequence P ∈N(n, m, 1) with T as its unique valid tree if and only if m ≥⌈d
2⌉
[5]. These arguments lead us in two directions.
Question 4.7. Consider N(n, m, 1) for m > 1. The previous argument can be modiﬁed to show that any
plane tree with a vertex of degree at least 2m + 1 cannot represent a primary sequence for P ∈N(n, m, 1).
• Can we characterize the primary sequences P ∈N(n, m, 1)?
• Given a plane tree T can we characterize the sequences P ∈N(n, m, 1) such that V(P) = {T }?
A related question, about the total number of possible secondary structures, can be addressed using Motzkin
numbers, as described in [5]. However that enumeration does not count the number of sequences that have
only one secondary structure.
4.2. Comparing R(n, m) for diﬀerent n and m. Proposition 4.3 can be interpreted as showing that
|R(n, m)| ≤Cn−1 +1. We further analyze the sets R(n, m) and exploit prime factorization to construct sets
R(n, m) that contain desired elements.


Valid Plane Trees
13
Proposition 4.8. Let k ∈Z≥0 factor into a product of primes k = kα1
1 · · · kαℓ
ℓ
such that for each i, there
exists a pair (ni, mi) with ki ∈R(ni, mi). Then
k ∈R
 ℓ
X
i=1
αini,
ℓ
X
i=1
αimi
!
Proof. Fix a complementary alphabet with 2 Pℓ
i=1 αimi letters. For each i with 1 ≤i ≤ℓlet Pi be a
primary sequence in N(ni, mi, ki). Such a Pi exists since ki ∈R(ni, mi). For each i make αi copies of
Pi and denote them Pi,1, Pi,2, . . . , Pi,αi. Now change the complementary letters as needed so that no two
primary sequences Pi,j, Pi′,j′ share a letter unless i = i′ and j = j′.
Consider the sequence P = P1,1P1,2P1,3 · · · Pℓ,αℓobtained by concatenating these sequences. No half-edge
from Pi,j can match with a half-edge from Pi′,j′ unless i = i′ and j = j′ since the alphabets used for the
subsequences Pi,j and Pi′,j′ are distinct. Thus every P-valid plane tree consists of Pi,j-valid plane subtrees
joined at a common root and the only P-valid local moves are Pi,j-valid local moves on the subtrees. Since
there are ki of the Pi,j-valid plane trees and since the Pi,j-valid local moves are independent, there are
k = kα1
1 · · · kαℓ
ℓ
trees in V(P) as desired.
□
Wagner proved a conjecture of an earlier version of this manuscript that for all k ∈Z≥0 there exists n, m
such that k ∈R(n, m). In fact, he showed the stronger result that every integer k appears in R(n, 1). He
also proved that R(n, m) is not generally the same set as R(n, 1) which disproved another conjecture of ours
[12].
5. How many sequences are valid?
This last section enumerates the total number of primary sequences that have any valid plane trees. These
sequences are extremely unusual, in the sense that the ratio of sequences that are valid in a ﬁxed alphabet
approaches zero as sequence length increases.
Our main tool comes from Corollary 3.11: every primary sequence P corresponds to at most one labeled
tree with no valid local moves of type 2, namely the tree T0 produced by the greedy algorithm. Thus we
may count the number of valid primary sequences by counting the number of labeled plane trees with no
type 2 local moves.
Lemma 5.1. Every plane tree T is the output T0(P) of the greedy algorithm for some valid sequence P.
Proof. Given a plane tree T , label the edges incident to the root with any complementary pair from the
alphabet. Each edge not incident to the root has a parent edge. Starting from the edges adjacent to the
root, label each edge so that it has no local move with its parent edge. Then the labeled tree T has no
local moves of type 2 and thus is the output T0(P) of the greedy algorithm for the sequence P obtained by
reading the labels on the half-edges.
□
Note that a labeled tree generated by this procedure does not produce a tree with no local moves, only with
none of type 2. For example if a plane tree has a vertex of degree 2m + 1 or more, there is always a local
move; the process in the previous lemma simply ensures that it is a local move of type 1.
We can enumerate valid sequences by counting labeled trees with no local moves of type 2.
Theorem 5.2. The number of valid primary sequences is
(1)
|P(n, m)| =
X
λ=(λ1,...,λk)
a composition of n
(2m)k · (2m −1)n−k ·
k
Y
i=1
Cλi−1
where Cλi−1 is the (λi −1)th Catalan number.


14
Black, Drellich, and Tymoczko
Proof. By Lemma 5.1 we can count the number of valid sequences by counting the number of plane trees
with no local moves of type 2. We partition the set of plane trees based on the number of edges incident to
the root and the size of the subtrees coming oﬀof those edges.
Suppose there are k edges incident to the root. The k subtrees descending from those k edges divide the n
edges of the tree into k parts, say with the ith of size λi including the edge incident to the root. This gives
a composition λ = (λ1, ..., λk) of n. Moreover the ith subtree can be any of Cλi−1 possible plane trees.
Label the edges in order of their distance to the root. Each of the k edges incident to the root has no parent
edge and thus has 2m possible labels. Every other edge in the tree has a parent so there are 2m −1 ways
to label it without creating a local move of type 2. Thus there are 2m · (2m −1)λi−1 · Cλi−1 possibilities for
labeling the ith subtree.
Taking the product over all k such subtrees, there are (2m)k · (2m −1)n−k ·
kQ
i=1
Cλi−1 labeled plane trees
with no valid local moves of type 2 corresponding to the composition λ. Summing over all compositions λ
of n gives the desired result.
□
The other main result of this section is that the ratio of valid primary sequences to all primary sequences
approaches zero as n increases.
Theorem 5.3. Fix m and let S(n, m) denote all possible words of length 2n over a complementary alphabet
of size 2m. Then
lim
n→∞
|P(n, m)|
|S(n, m)| = 0.
Proof. When m = 1 the number of valid plane sequences |P(n, 1)| is at most
 2n
n

since each valid plane
sequence must have the same number of letters B as B. (In fact |P(n, 1)| =
 2n
n

.) There are a total of 22n
words in {B, B} of length 2n. By Stirling’s approximation for n! we know
lim
n→∞
 2n
n

22n = lim
n→∞
4n
√πn
22n = lim
n→∞
1
√πn = 0.
When m > 1 we obtain an upper bound on |P(n, m)| by overcounting the set of valid plane trees T0 that can
be produced by the greedy algorithm. The greedy algorithm produces diﬀerent outputs on diﬀerent valid
sequences because there is only one way to read the sequence oﬀof the labeled plane tree. We use the total
number of valid plane trees as our upper bound; this is a strict overcount because some valid plane trees
have a valid local move of type 2, unlike output of the greedy algorithm. There are (2m)nCn valid plane
trees since there are Cn plane trees with n edges, 2m ways to pick the letter labeling each left-half-edge,
and 1 way to pick the complementary letters on the right-half-edges. There are a total of (2m)2n words in
the alphabet of length 2n. Thus
lim
n→∞
|P(n, m)|
|S(n, m)| < lim
n→∞
(2m)nCn
(2m)2n
= lim
n→∞
1
n + 1
 2n
n

(2m)n ≤lim
n→∞
1
n + 1
 2n
n

22n
using the deﬁnition of Catalan numbers and the fact that m ≥2. The limit of the ratio (2n
n )
22n was just
computed to be zero, so as n grows we obtain
lim
n→∞
|P(n, m)|
|S(n, m)| < lim
n→∞
1
n + 1
 2n
n

22n < lim
n→∞
 2n
n

22n = 0
which proves the claim.
□
6. Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge useful conversations with Christine Heitsch, very helpful comments from
the referee, and the support of the Smith College Center for Women in Mathematics.


Valid Plane Trees
15
References
[1] Drew Armstrong, Nicholas A. Loehr, and Gregory W. Warrington. Rational parking functions and catalan numbers.
arxiv:1403.1845, 2014.
[2] Mikl´os B´ona, editor. Handbook of Enumerative Combinatorics. Discrete Mathematics and its Applications. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, 2015.
[3] Steﬀen Eger. Stirling’s approximation for central extended binomial coeﬃcients. The American Mathematical Monthly,
121(4):344–349, 2014.
[4] Christoph Flamm and Ivo L. Hofacker. Beyond energy minimization: approaches to the kinetic folding of RNA. Monatsheft
fˆu Chemie Chemical Monthly, 139:447–457, 2008.
[5] Christine Heitsch and Svetlana Poznanovi´c. Combinatorial insights into RNA secondary structure. In Discrete and topo-
logical models in molecular biology, Nat. Comput. Ser., pages 145–166. Springer, Heidelberg, 2014.
[6] Christine E. Heitsch. Combinatorics on plane trees, motivated by RNA secondary structure conﬁgurations. preprint.
[7] Ivo L. Hofacker, Peter Schuster, and Peter F. Stadler. Combinatorics of RNA secondary structures. Discrete Applied
Mathematics, 88:207–237, 1998.
[8] Todd Kemp, Karl Mahlburg, Amarpreet Rattan, and Cliﬀord Smyth. Enumeration of non-crossing pairings on bit strings.
J. Comb. Theory, Ser. A, 118(1):129–151, 2011.
[9] Jon McCammond. Noncrossing partitions in surprising locations. American Mathematical Monthly, 113:598, 610 2006.
[10] Rick Russel, editor. Biophysics of RNA Folding. Springer, New York, 2013.
[11] Paul R. F. Schumacher and Catherine H. Yan. On the enumeration of non-crossing pairings of well-balanced binary strings.
Annals of Combinatorics, 17(2):379–391, 2013.
[12] Zsolt Adam Wagner. On some conjectures about combinatorial models for RNA secondary structures. Correspondence
with the authors, 2015.
