arXiv:math/0301225v2  [math.GR]  10 May 2003
Diagram groups and directed 2-complexes: homotopy and
homology
V. S. Guba, M. V. Sapir∗
Abstract
We show that diagram groups can be viewed as fundamental groups of spaces of positive
paths on directed 2-complexes (these spaces of paths turn out to be classifying spaces). Thus
diagram groups are analogs of second homotopy groups, although diagram groups are as a
rule non-Abelian. Part of the paper is a review of the previous results from this point of
view. In particular, we show that the so called rigidity of the R. Thompson’s group F and
some other groups is similar to the ﬂat torus theorem. We ﬁnd several ﬁnitely presented
diagram groups (even of type F∞) each of which contains all countable diagram groups.
We show how to compute minimal presentations and homology groups of a large class of
diagram groups. We show that the Poincar´e series of these groups are rational functions.
We prove that all integer homology groups of all diagram groups are free Abelian.
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Combinatorial deﬁnition
3
3
Topological deﬁnition
7
4
Theorems about isomorphism. The class of diagram groups
11
5
Morphisms of complexes and universal diagram groups
13
6
Presentations of diagram groups
18
7
Rooted 2-trees
23
8
Universal 2-covers of directed 2-complexes
25
9
Homology
30
10 Rigidity
38
References
40
∗The research of the ﬁrst author was partially supported by the RFFI grant 99–01–00894 and the INTAS
grant 99–1224. The research of the second author was supported in part by the NSF grants DMS 0072307 and
9978802 and the US-Israeli BSF grant 1999298.
1


1
Introduction
The ﬁrst deﬁnition of diagram groups was given by Meakin and Sapir in terms of string rewrit-
ing systems (semigroup presentations). Some results about diagram groups were obtained by
Meakin’s student Vesna Kilibarda [22, 23]. Further results about diagram groups have been
obtained by the authors of this paper [16, 17, 18], D. Farley [14], and B. Wiest [34].
The deﬁnition of diagram groups in terms of string rewriting systems does not reﬂect the
geometry of diagram groups and geometrical nature of the constructions that can be applied to
diagram groups. In this paper we introduce a more geometric deﬁnition of diagram groups in
terms of directed 2-complexes.
A directed 2-complex (see [33, 27]) is a directed graph equipped with 2-cells each of which
is bounded by two directed paths (the top path and the bottom path). With any directed
2-complex one can associate the set of (directed) homotopies or 2-paths which is deﬁned similar
to the set of combinatorial homotopies between 1-paths in ordinary combinatorial 2-complexes.
Equivalence classes of 2-paths form a groupoid with respect to the natural concatenation of
homotopies. The local groups of that groupoid are the diagram groups of the directed 2-comp-
lex. Thus, from this point of view, the diagram groups are “directed” analogs of the second
homotopy groups.
The new point of view gave us an opportunity to revisit some earlier results about diagram
groups.
We show that (a multi-dimensional version of) the Squier complex of a semigroup
presentation has a natural realization as the space of positive paths in a directed 2-complex.
We also show that several facts about diagram groups proved earlier have a natural topological
interpretation in terms of directed 2-complexes.
The only major part of our previous work that is not revisited here is the combinatorics on
diagrams ([16, Section 15]): the description of centralizers of elements in diagram groups, solving
conjugacy problem, etc. All these results can be easily generalized to the case of diagrams over
directed 2-complexes.
The largest part of the paper is devoted to completely new results. In particular, we ﬁnd
several diagram groups of type F∞each of which contains all countable diagram groups. One
of them has only 3 generators and 6 deﬁning relations. Recall that a group G is said to be of
type F∞if there is some K(G, 1) CW complex having a ﬁnite n-skeleton in each dimension n.
We show that the universal cover of the space of positive paths of a directed 2-complex K
is homeomorphic to the the space of positive paths of what we call the universal 2-cover of K
which is again a directed 2-complex. The universal 2-covers possess some remarkable properties
which make them 2-dimensional analogs of rooted trees. We call such directed 2-complexes
rooted 2-trees.
We study complete directed 2-complexes (they are analogs of complete string rewriting
systems). We show how to construct a minimal K(G, 1) CW complex (with respect to the
number of cells in each dimension) for a diagram group G of a complete directed 2-complex.
We compute integer homology of such groups, and show that in the case when the groups are of
type F∞(that happens very often), the Poincar´e series are rational. We answer Pride’s question
by showing that the integer homology groups of arbitrary diagram groups are free Abelian. We
also study the cohomological dimension of diagram groups of complete directed 2-complexes.
In particular, we show that the cohomological dimension of a group in that class is ≥n if and
only if the group contains a copy of Zn (for any natural number n).
It was shown by Farley [14] that diagram groups of ﬁnite semigroup presentations act freely
cellularly by isometries on CAT(0) cubical complexes.
One of the important results in the
2


theory of CAT(0) groups is the ﬂat torus theorem that shows a rigid connection between a
group acting “nicely” on a CAT(0) space, and a geometric property of the space. The algebraic
property is “to contain a copy of Zn”, and the geometric property is “to contain a Zn-invariant
copy of Rn”. We show that similar rigid connection exists in our situation between, say, the
R. Thompson group F and the universal cover of the space of positive paths of the Dunce hat.
The results of this paper are used in our next paper [19] to show that all diagram groups
are totally orderable.
2
Combinatorial deﬁnition
We start by giving a precise deﬁnition of directed 2-complexes. Our deﬁnition diﬀers insigniﬁ-
cantly from the original deﬁnition in [33] and is close to the deﬁnition of [27].
Deﬁnition 2.1. For every directed graph Γ let P be the set of all (directed) paths in Γ, including
the empty paths. A directed 2-complex is a directed graph Γ equipped with a set F (called the
set of 2-cells), and three maps ⌈·⌉: F →P, ⌊·⌋: F →P, and −1: F →F called top, bottom, and
inverse such that
• for every f ∈F, the paths ⌈f⌉and ⌊f⌋are non-empty and have common initial vertices
and common terminal vertices,
• −1 is an involution without ﬁxed points, and

f −1
= ⌊f⌋,

f −1
= ⌈f⌉for every f ∈F.
We shall often need an orientation on F, that is, a subset F+ ⊆F of positive 2-cells, such
that F is the disjoint union of F+ and the set F−= (F+)−1 (the latter is called the set of
negative 2-cells).
If K is a directed 2-complex, then paths on K are called 1-paths (we are going to have 2-paths
later). The initial and terminal vertex of a 1-path p are denoted by ι(p) and τ(p), respectively.
For every 2-cell f ∈F, the vertices ι(⌈f⌉) = ι(⌊f⌋) and τ(⌈f⌉) = τ(⌊f⌋) are denoted ι(f) and
τ(f), respectively.
A 2-cell f ∈F with top 1-path p and bottom 1-path q will be called a 2-cell of the form
p = q. We shall use a notation K = ⟨E | ⌈f⌉= ⌊f⌋, f ∈F+ ⟩for a directed 2-complex with
one vertex, the set of edges E and the set of 2-cells F.
For example, the complex ⟨x | x2 = x ⟩is the Dunce hat obtained by identifying all edges
in the triangle (Figure 1) according to their directions. It has one vertex, one edge, and one
positive 2-cell. The remarkable feature of the Dunce hat is that the famous R. Thompson’s
group F is its diagram group (see Section 6 below).
(The survey [13] collects some known
results about F. See also [9, 5, 6, 16, 17, 4, 15] for other results about this group.)
      ✒❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❅
❘
✲
x
x
x
Figure 1.
There exists a natural way to assign a directed 2-complex to every semigroup presentation
(to a string rewriting system). It is similar to assigning a 2-complex to any group presentation.
3


If P = ⟨X | ui = vi
(i ∈I) ⟩is a string rewriting system, then the corresponding directed
complex KP has one vertex, one edge e for each generator from X, and one positive 2-cell for
each relation ui = vi. The top path of this cell is labelled by ui and the bottom path labelled
by vi.
Every directed 2-complex K = ⟨E | ⌈f⌉= ⌊f⌋, f ∈F+ ⟩with one vertex can be considered
as a rewriting system with the alphabet E and the set of rewriting rules F+. The diﬀerence
between these directed 2-complexes and string rewriting systems is that there may be several
2-cells in K with the same top and bottom 1-paths, hence a rewriting rule p = q can repeat
many times. We shall observe later that directed 2-complexes with one vertex provide the same
class of diagram groups as all directed 2-complexes. But sometimes it is convenient to consider
complexes with more than one vertex.
With the directed 2-complex K, one can associate a category Π(K) whose objects are 1-
paths, and morphisms are 2-paths (or homotopies), i. e. sequences of replacements of ⌈f⌉by
⌊f⌋in 1-paths, f ∈F. More precisely, an atomic 2-path (an elementary homotopy) is a triple
(p, f, q), where p, q are 1-paths in K, and f ∈F such that τ(p) = ι(f), τ(f) = ι(q). If δ is the
atomic 2-path (p, f, q), then p ⌈f⌉q is denoted by ⌈δ⌉, and p ⌊f⌋q is denoted by ⌊δ⌋; these are
called the top and the bottom 1-paths of the atomic 2-path. Every nontrivial 2-path δ on K is
a sequence of atomic paths δ1, . . . , δn, where ⌊δi⌋= ⌈δi+1⌉for every 1 ≤i < n. In this case
n is called the length of the 2-path δ. The top and the bottom 1-paths of δ, denoted by ⌈δ⌉
and ⌊δ⌋, are ⌈δ1⌉and ⌊δn⌋, respectively. We say that δ is positive if each δi corresponds to a
positive 2-cell in K. Every 1-path p is considered as a trivial 2-path with ⌈p⌉= ⌊p⌋= p. These
are the identity morphisms in the category Π(K). The composition of 2-paths δ and δ′ is called
concatenation and is denoted δ ◦δ′.
We say that 1-paths p, q in K are (directly) homotopic whenever there exists a 2-path δ
such that ⌈δ⌉= p and ⌊δ⌋= q. We also say that δ connects p to q in K.
As in the standard homotopy theory (see, for example, [31]), we need to introduce a ho-
motopy relation on the set of 2-paths and identify homotopic 2-paths in Π(K). To do this, we
choose a computation-friendly way, similar to the one developed by Peiﬀer, Reidemeister and
Whitehead for the second homotopy group of a combinatorial 2-complex, and later simpliﬁed
by Huebschmann, Sieradski and Fenn (see Bogley and Pride [2]). The idea is to represent the
elements of the second homotopy groups in terms of the so called pictures. We are going to use
the dual objects called diagrams (for a picture version, see [16]).
With every atomic 2-path δ = (p, f, q), where ⌈f⌉= u, ⌊f⌋= v we associate the labelled
plane graph ∆on Figure 2. An arc labelled by a word w is subdivided into |w| edges1. All
edges are oriented from the left to the right. The label of each oriented edge of the graph is a
symbol from the alphabet E, the set of edges in K. As a plane graph, it has only one bounded
face; we label it by the corresponding cell f of K. This plane graph ∆is called the diagram of
δ. Such diagrams are called atomic. The leftmost and rightmost vertices of ∆are denoted by
ι(∆) and τ(∆), respectively. The diagram ∆has two distinguished paths from ι(∆) to τ(∆)
that correspond to the top and bottom paths of δ. Their labels are puq and pvq, respectively.
These are called the top and the bottom paths of ∆denoted by ⌈∆⌉and ⌊∆⌋.
1In this paper, we denote the length of a word or a path w by |w|.
4


s
s
s
s
p
u
q
f
v
Figure 2.
The diagram corresponding to the trivial 2-path p is just an arc labelled by p; it is called a
trivial diagram and it is denoted by ε(p).
Let δ = δ1 ◦δ2 ◦· · · ◦δn be a 2-path in K, where δ1, . . . , δn are atomic 2-paths. Let ∆i be
the atomic diagram corresponding to δi. Then the bottom path of ∆i has the same label as the
top path of ∆i+1 (1 ≤i < n). Hence we can identify the bottom path of ∆i with the top path
of ∆i+1 for all 1 ≤i < n, and obtain a plane graph ∆, which is called the diagram of the 2-path
δ.
It is clear that the above diagram ∆, as a plane graph, has exactly n bounded faces or cells.
Two diagrams are considered equal if they are isotopic as plane graphs. The isotopy must
take vertices to vertices, edges to edges, it must also preserve labels of edges and inner labels
of cells. Two 2-paths are called isotopic if the corresponding diagrams are equal.
For example, consider the diagram on Figure 3 below. It is clear that it corresponds to the
2-path
(p, f1, qu2r) ◦(pv1q, f2, r)
(1)
as well as the 2-path
(pu1q, f2, r) ◦(p, f1, qv2r).
(2)
s
s
s
s
s
s
p
u1
f1
q
u2
r
v1
f2
v2
Figure 3.
In that case we call the atomic 2-paths (p, f1, qu2r) and (pu1q, f2, r) independent.
The proof of the following lemma in the case of semigroup presentations can be extracted
from the proof of [16, Lemma 6.2]. We leave it to the reader to generalize the proof to the case
of directed 2-complexes.
Lemma 2.2. The isotopy relation on 2-paths of a directed 2-complex K is the smallest equiv-
alence relation containing all pairs of 2-paths of the form (1) and (2) and invariant under
concatenation.
Concatenation of 2-paths corresponds to the concatenation of diagrams: if the bottom path
of ∆1 and the top path of ∆2 have the same labels, we can identify them and obtain a new
diagram ∆1 ◦∆2.
Note that for any atomic 2-path δ = (p, f, q) in K one can naturally deﬁne its inverse 2-path
δ−1 = (p, f −1, q). The inverses of all 2-paths and diagrams are deﬁned naturally. The inverse
diagram ∆−1 of ∆is obtained by taking the mirror image of ∆with respect to a horizontal
line, and replacing labels of cells by their inverses.
5


Let us identify in the category Π(K) all isotopic 2-paths and also identify each 2-path of
the form δ′δδ−1δ′′ with δ′δ′′. The quotient category is obviously a groupoid (i. e. a category
with invertible morphisms). It is denoted by D(K) and is called the diagram groupoid of K.
Two 2-paths are called homotopic if they correspond to the same morphism in D(K). For each
1-path p of K, the local group of D(K) at p (i. e. the group of equivalence classes of 2-paths
connecting p with itself) is called the diagram group of the directed 2-complex K with base p
and is denoted by D(K, p). Notice that if p is empty, then D(K, p) is trivial by deﬁnition. In
this paper, we shall usually ignore these diagram groups.
We shall give a much easier (equivalent) deﬁnition of the diagram groupoid after Theorem
2.6 below.
Remark 2.3. Notice ﬁrst that the diagram groups of a directed 2-complex do not depend on
the orientation on the set of 2-cells of that complex. Notice also that if a directed 2-complex
K′ is obtained from K by identifying vertices, then the diagram groupoid of K′ may diﬀer from
the diagram groupoid of K because the set of 1-paths may increase, but the diagram groups of
K will be diagram groups of K′ as well.
One can easily check that if K = KP for some semigroup presentation P and w is a word over
X (that is, the corresponding path in KP), then the diagram group D(K, w) we just deﬁned
coincides with the diagram group D(P, w) over P deﬁned in [16]. Clearly, if K = KP then
2-paths are just the derivations over the semigroup presentation P.
It is convenient to deﬁne diagrams over a directed 2-complex K in an “abstract” way, without
referring to 2-paths of K. Such a deﬁnition was given by Kashintsev [21] and Remmers [28] in
the case of semigroup presentations. Here we basically repeat their deﬁnition and result.
Deﬁnition 2.4. A diagram over K = ⟨E | ⌈f⌉= ⌊f⌋, f ∈F+ ⟩is a ﬁnite plane directed and
connected graph ∆, where every edge is labelled by an element from E, and every bounded face
is labelled by an element of F such that:
• ∆has exactly one vertex-source ι (which has no incoming edges) and exactly one vertex-
sink τ (which has no outgoing edges);
• every 1-path in ∆is simple;
• each face of ∆labelled by f ∈F is bounded by two 1-paths u and v such that the label
of u is ⌈f⌉, the label of v is ⌊f⌋, and the loop uv−1 on the plane goes around the face in
the clockwise direction.
It is easy to see [16] that every plane graph satisfying the conditions of Deﬁnition 2.4 is
situated between two positive paths connecting ι and τ. These paths are ⌈∆⌉and ⌊∆⌋.
We say that a diagram ∆over a directed 2-complex K is a (u, v)-diagram whenever u is the
top label and v is the bottom label of ∆. If u and v are the same, then the diagram is called
spherical (with base u = v).
The following lemma (see [16, Lemma 3.5]) shows that diagrams over K in the sense of
Deﬁnition 2.4 are exactly diagrams that correspond to 2-paths in K. We will often use this fact
without reference.
Lemma 2.5. Let K be a directed 2-complex. Then 1-paths u, v are homotopic in K if and only
if there exists a (u, v)-diagram over K (in the sense of Deﬁnition 2.4).
6


Diagrams over K corresponding to homotopic 2-paths are called equivalent. The equivalence
relation on the set of diagrams (and the homotopy relation on the set of 2-paths of K) can be
deﬁned very easily as follows. We say that two cells π1 and π2 in a diagram ∆over K form
a dipole if ⌊π1⌋coincides with ⌈π2⌉and the labels of the cells π1 and π2 are mutually inverse.
Clearly, if π1 and π2 form a dipole, then one can remove the two cells from the diagram and
identify ⌈π1⌉with ⌊π2⌋. The result will be some diagram ∆′. As in [16], it is easy to prove that
if δ is a 2-path corresponding to ∆, then the diagram ∆′ corresponds to a 2-path δ′, which is
homotopic to δ. We call a diagram reduced if it does not contain dipoles. A 2-path δ in K is
called reduced if the corresponding diagram is reduced. The following is an analog of Kilibarda’s
lemma. The proof coincides with the proof of [16, Theorem 3.17] and we omit it here.
Theorem 2.6. Every equivalence class of diagrams over a directed 2-complex K contains exactly
one reduced diagram. Every 2-path in K is homotopic to a reduced 2-path, every two homotopic
reduced 2-paths have equal diagrams and so they contain the same number of atomic factors.
Thus one can deﬁne morphisms in the diagram groupoid D(K) as reduced diagrams over K
with operation “concatenation + reduction” (that is, the product of two reduced diagrams ∆
and ∆′ is the result of removing all dipoles from ∆◦∆′ step by step).
The diagram groupoid D(K) has another natural operation, addition: if ∆′ and ∆′′ are
diagrams over K and τ(⌈∆′⌉) = ι(⌈∆′′⌉) in K then one can identify τ(∆′) with ι(∆′′) to obtain
the new diagram denoted by ∆′ + ∆′′ and called the sum of ∆′ and ∆′′. If K has only one
vertex, then this operation is everywhere deﬁned. In that case the operation of addition makes
D(K) a tensor groupoid in the sense of [20].
Figure 4 below illustrates the concepts of the concatenation of diagrams and the sum of
them.
r
r
∆′
∆′′
∆′ ◦∆′′
r
r
r
∆′
∆′′
∆′ + ∆′′
Figure 4.
3
Topological deﬁnition
We have seen that diagram groups are directed analogs of the second homotopy groups. Recall
that one can deﬁne the second homotopy groups of a topological space as the fundamental group
of a space of paths. On the other hand, in the case of semigroup presentations, the diagram
groups can be deﬁned as fundamental groups of the so called 2-dimensional Squier complexes
associated with the presentations (see [16]).
In this section, we show that the Squier complex of a directed 2-complex K can be considered
as the space of certain positive paths in K.
First we deﬁne a multi-dimensional version of the Squier complex Sq(K) from [16] as a
semi-cubical complex. Recall [30, 10] that a semi-cubical complex is a family of disjoint sets
{Mn; n ≥0} (the elements of Mn are called n-cubes) with face maps λk
i : Mn →Mn−1 (1 ≤i ≤n,
k = 0, 1) satisfying the semi-cubical relations (the rightmost map act ﬁrst):
λk
i λk′
j = λk′
j−1λk
i
(i < j).
(3)
7


A realization of a semi-cubical complex {Mn; n ≥0} can be obtained as a factor-space
of the disjoint union of Euclidean cubes, one n-cube c(x) for each element x ∈Mn, n ≥0.
The equivalence relation identiﬁes (point-wise) the cube λk
i (c(x)) with the cube c(λk
i (x)) for
all i, k, x. Here λk
i (In) is the corresponding (n −1)-face of the Euclidean n-cube In (that is,
λk
i (In) = Ii−1 × {k} × In−i ).
Deﬁnition 3.1. The semi-cubical complex Sq(K) is deﬁned as follows. For every n ≥0, let
Mn be the set of thin diagrams [14] of the form
ε(u0) + f (1) + ε(u1) + · · · + f (n) + ε(un)
(4)
where f (i) are negative2 2-cells of K and ui are 1-paths in K (Figure 3 thus shows a thin diagram
with two cells). The face map λk
i takes the thin diagram c of the form (4) to
⌈c⌉i = ε(u0) + f (1) + · · · +
l
f (i)m
+ · · · + f (n) + ε(un)
(5)
if k = 0 and
⌊c⌋i = ε(u0) + f (1) + · · · +
j
f (i)k
+ · · · + f (n) + ε(un)
(6)
if k = 1. These faces are called the top and the bottom ith faces of c, respectively. It is easy to
check that the conditions (3) are satisﬁed, so Sq(K) is a semi-cubical complex.
Remark 3.2. Note that the realization of Sq(K) does not depend on the orientation F+ on K.
If we change the orientation, then some cells fi in the thin diagram (4) are replaced by their
inverses. This means that we simply change the reference point of a cube. So we will think
about every thin diagram as of a cube with ﬁxed reference point.
Thus the vertices of Sq(K) are 1-paths of K, the edges correspond to negative atomic 2-paths
(u, f, v), 2-cells correspond to pairs of independent atomic 2-paths, etc. For example, the thin
diagram ε(u) + f + ε(v) + g + ε(w) determines a square with contour
(u, f, v ⌈g⌉w) ◦(u ⌊f⌋v, g, w) ◦(u, f −1, v ⌊g⌋w) ◦(u ⌈f⌉v, g−1, w).
It is convenient to enrich the structure of the Squier complex Sq(K) by introducing inverse
edges: (u, f, v)−1 = (u, f −1, v). Then the edges (u, f, v) will be called positive if f is a positive
2-cell of K, and negative if f is negative. As a result, the 1-skeleton of Sq(K) turns into a graph
in the sense of Serre [29], and the 2-skeleton of Sq(K) coincides with the Squier complex deﬁned
in [16] provided K = KP for some P. Hence, in particular, the fundamental groups of Sq(KP)
coincide with fundamental groups of the Squier complex in [16].
Clearly the complex Sq(K) is in general disconnected. If p is a 1-path in K, then by Sq(K, p)
we will denote the connected component of the Squier complex that contains p.
Example 3.3. Figure 5 shows a part of the Squier complex of the Dunce hat on Figure 1. The
thick line shows the boundary of one of the 2-cells in this complex.
s
s
s
s
s
. . .
x
x2
x3
x4
Figure 5.
2Taking negative edges instead of positive simpliﬁes some computations later.
8


The following theorem is similar to Kilibarda’s statement (see [16, Theorem 6.1]).
Theorem 3.4. Let K be a directed 2-complex, p be a 1-path in K. Then the diagram group
D(K, p) is isomorphic to the fundamental group π1(Sq(K), p) of the semi-cubical complex Sq(K)
with the basepoint p.
The proof of Kilibarda’s theorem carries without any essential changes. As an immediate
corollary of Theorem 3.4, we obtain the following
Corollary 3.5. Let K be a directed 2-complex, p and q be homotopic 1-paths in K.
Then
D(K, p) is isomorphic to D(K, q).
Proof. Indeed, p and q belong to the same connected component of Sq(K).
The diagram groups with diﬀerent bases can be very diﬀerent but there exists the following
useful relationship between them.
Corollary 3.6. If p = p1p2 is a 1-path in K, then D(K, p1) × D(K, p2) is embedded into
D(K, p1p2).
Proof. Indeed, the map (∆1, ∆2) →∆1 + ∆2 from D(K, p1) × D(K, p2) to D(K, p1p2) is an
injective homomorphism (see [16], Remark 2 after Lemma 8.1).
Now let us introduce a natural topological realization of the semi-cubical complex Sq(K).
We expand the set of paths in K allowing paths that go “inside” 2-cells.
Let K be a directed 2-complex. Attaching a 2-cell f ∈F+ with p = ⌈f⌉, q = ⌊f⌋can be
done as follows. Let D = [0, 1] × [0, 1] be a unit square. For any t ∈[0, 1] we have the path dt
in D deﬁned by dt(s) = (s, t) ∈D (s ∈[0, 1]). We attach this square to K in such a way that
d0 is identiﬁed with p, d1 is identiﬁed with q, all points of the form (0, t) ∈D are collapsed to
ι(p) = ι(q), all points of the form (1, t) are collapsed to τ(p) = τ(q) (t ∈[0, 1]).
Now for any t ∈[0, 1], the image of dt in K becomes a path inside the 2-cell f. This path
will be denoted by ft. Clearly, f0 = p, f1 = q. So we have a continuous family of paths {ft}
(t ∈[0, 1]) that transforms p into q (see Figure 6).
For any f ∈F+, t ∈[0, 1] one can also deﬁne (f −1)t = f1−t. So ft makes sense for any
f ∈F.
✲
dt
(0, 1)
(1, 1)
(0, 0)
(1, 0)
(1, t)
(0, t)
D
s
s
q = f1
p = f0
ft
2-cell f
✲
Figure 6.
9


By deﬁnition, a positive path in a directed 2-complex K is a ﬁnite product of the form p1 · · · pn
(n ≥1), where each factor pi (1 ≤i ≤n) is either a 1-path on K, or a path of the form ft for
some f ∈F, t ∈[0, 1]. Of course, we assume that the terminal point of pi coincides with the
initial point of pi+1 for any 1 ≤i < n. The set of all positive paths in K deﬁned in this way
will be denoted by Ω+(K). Note that every 1-path in K is a positive path in this sense.
Note that every positive path p in Ω+(K) can be uniquely written in the normal form
p = u0f (1)
t1 u1 · · · f (n)
tn un, where ui are 1-paths in K (0 ≤i ≤n), f (i) ∈F−, ti ∈(0, 1) (1 ≤
i ≤n).
To the path p we assign a point ξ(p) with coordinates (t1, . . . , tn) in the n-cube
ε(u0) + f (1) + · · · + f (n) + ε(un) (see Figure 7).
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
. . .
u0
u1
un
f (1)
t1
f (2)
t2
f (n)
tn
Figure 7.
Lemma 3.7. The map ξ is a bijection between Ω+(K) and a realization of Sq(K). For any
positive path
p = u0f (1)
t1 u1 · · · f (n)
tn un
(7)
in Ω+(K), where ui are 1-paths in K (0 ≤i ≤n) and ti ∈[0, 1] (1 ≤i ≤n), the point ξ(p) has
coordinates (t1, . . . , tn) in the n-cube ε(u0) + f (1) + · · · + f (n) + ε(un).
Proof. Any point x in a realization of Sq(K) is an inner point of a unique cube (the point
of a cube of dimension 0 is inner in itself by deﬁnition).
Let x be a point in the n-cube
ε(u0) + f (1) + · · · + f (n) + ε(un) with coordinates (t1, . . . , tn), where f (i) ∈F−, ti ∈(0, 1)
(1 ≤i ≤n). One can assign to it the positive path p = u0f (1)
t1 u1 · · · f (n)
tn un (written in the
normal form). This deﬁnes a map ζ from a realization of Sq(K) to Ω+(K). It is obvious that ξ
and ζ are mutually inverse. Thus ξ is a bijection.
Now we have to check that if p is written in the form (7), where some subscripts ti are equal
to 0 or 1, then the image of p under ξ is deﬁned by the same rule. Changing the reference
point of a cube, we may assume that f (i) ∈F−for all i. Now one can pass from (7) to the
normal form of p step by step replacing subpaths of the form f (i)
0
by

f (i)
and f (i)
1
by

f (i)
.
Let us analyze what happens at one elementary step. Without loss of generality assume that a
subpath of the form f0 is replaced by ⌈f⌉. So our path is written in two forms: · · · ui · · · and
· · · u′f0u′′ · · ·, where ui = u′ ⌈f⌉u′′. The rule deﬁning ξ assigns two points to these forms. One
of them belongs to the cube c′ = · · ·+ε(ui)+· · · and has coordinates (t1, . . . , tn) in it. The other
point belongs to the cube c = · · ·+ε(u′)+f +ε(u′′)+· · · and has coordinates (t1, . . . , 0, . . . , tn),
where 0 is inserted after ti. The cube c′ is the (i + 1)th face of c. By deﬁnition of Sq(K), we
glue c′ and ⌈c⌉i+1 isometrically. This means that these two points in a realization of Sq(K)
coincide.
Lemma 3.7 shows that Ω+(K) is a natural realization of the semi-cubical complex Sq(K).
Note that the empty paths correspond to isolated points in the Squier complex.
Thus we have an equivalent deﬁnition of diagram groups of K as the fundamental groups
of the space of positive paths in K. One possible way of generalizing the deﬁnition of diagram
groups and of deﬁning “continuous versions” of the diagram groups would be to consider a more
general spaces than directed 2-complexes, deﬁne “positive paths” in a suitable way, and then
10


to consider the fundamental groups of the spaces of positive paths. They may have certain
properties in common with diagram groups.
Usually we shall not distinguish between the Squier complex Sq(K) and its geometric real-
ization.
We shall return to the Squier complexes and consider their universal covers in Section 8.
4
Theorems about isomorphism. The class of diagram groups
In this section, we show that diagram groups do not change much if we do certain surgeries on
directed 2-complexes.
The following useful statement contains a directed 2-complex analog of Tietze transforma-
tions for group and semigroup presentations.
Theorem 4.1. Let K be a directed 2-complex.
1) Let u be a non-empty 1-path in K. Let K′ be the directed 2-complex obtained from K by
adding a new edge e with ι(e) = ι(u), τ(e) = τ(u) and a new 2-cell f of the form u = e (and
also the inverse 2-cell f −1). Then for every 1-path w in K, the diagram groups D(K, w) and
D(K′, w) are isomorphic.
2) Suppose that K is a union of two directed 2-complexes K1 and K2 such that all vertices
and edges of K are both in K1 and in K2. Suppose that the top path ⌈f⌉(bottom path ⌊f⌋) of
each positive 2-cell f of K1 is homotopic in K2 to some path uf (resp., vf). Let us consider the
directed complex K′ with the same vertices and edges as K and 2-cells from K2 together with all
positive 2-cells uf = vf for all positive 2-cells f from K1 (plus the corresponding negative cells
vf = uf). Then the diagram groups D(K, w) and D(K′, w) are isomorphic for every 1-path w
in K.
Proof. 1. Indeed, there exists a natural embedding of D(K, w) into D(K′, w) which maps every
reduced (w, w)-diagram over K to itself. In order to show that this map is surjective, notice
that if a (w, w)-diagram ∆over K′ does not contain edges labelled by e then it is a diagram
over K. If ∆contains an edge labelled by e then this edge cannot be on ⌈∆⌉or ⌊∆⌋. Hence this
edge is a common edge of the contours of two cells π and π′ in ∆. Since K′ has only two 2-cells
with e on the boundary (namely, f and f −1), one of the two cells π or π′ is labelled by f and
another by f −1 (the edge labelled by e is the top path of one of these cells and the bottom path
of another one). Hence π and π′ form a dipole. This implies that every reduced (w, w)-diagram
over K′ contains no edges labelled by e, and so it is a diagram over K. Hence by Theorem 2.6
the natural embedding of D(K, w) into D(K′, w) is surjective.
2. By Theorem 2.5, for any 2-cell f of K1 there exist diagrams Γf and ∆f over K2 such that
the label of ⌈Γf⌉is ⌈f⌉, the label of ⌊Γf⌋is uf, the label of ⌈∆f⌉is ⌊f⌋, the label of ⌊∆f⌋is vf.
By Dw (respectively, D′
w) we denote the set of all (w, w)-diagrams over K (respectively K′).
We are going to deﬁne two maps φ: Dw →D′
w, ψ: D′
w →Dw.
Let Ξ ∈Dw. Let F+
1 be the set of positive 2-cells in K1. For every cell π in Ξ with inner
label f ∈F+
1 , we do the following operation. First we cut π into three parts by connecting the
initial vertex of π with the terminal vertex of π by two simple curves, p1 and p2, that have no
intersections other than at the endpoints. We enumerate the three parts from top to bottom
and assume that p1 is above p2. Then we subdivide p1 into edges and give them labels such
that p1 will have label uf. Similarly, we turn p2 into a path labelled by vf. Now we insert the
diagram Γf between the top path of π and p1. Analogously, we insert ∆−1
f
between p2 and the
11


bottom path of π. The space between p1 and p2 becomes a cell uf = vf, which is a cell K′.
We can assign the inner label f to it. If the inner label of a cell π of Ξ is f −1 ∈F−
1 , then we
subdivide it in the same way to get the mirror image of the diagram we had for cells with inner
label f. (The inner label for the cell in the middle will be f −1.)
Every diagram Ξ over P now becomes a diagram over P′. We denote it by φ(Ξ).
The map ψ is deﬁned similarly. Now if we have a diagram Ξ over K′, then we replace each
of its cells π of the form uf = vf (f ∈F1) by the concatenation of three diagrams. The ﬁrst
of them is Γ−1
f , the third is ∆f, and the second one is a cell with inner label f. We do similar
transformation with cells of the form vf = uf whose inner labels are negative.
The result of these replacements will be a diagram over K denoted by ψ(Ξ).
It follows from our construction that for any diagram Ξ over K, the diagram ψ(φ(Ξ)) over K
is equivalent to Ξ. This is so because after applying φ and then ψ to Ξ, we get a diagram with
a number of subdiagrams of the form Γ±1Γ∓1 or ∆±1∆∓1. Cancelling all the dipoles, we get
the diagram Ξ we had in the beginning. Analogously, for any diagram Ξ over K′, the diagram
φ(ψ(Ξ)) over K′ will be equivalent to Ξ. It is also clear that φ and ψ preserve the operation of
concatenation of diagrams.
This means that maps φ, ψ induce homomorphisms of diagram groups ¯φ: D(K, w) →
D(K′, w) and ¯ψ: D(K′, w) →D(K, w).
The fact about equivalence of diagrams means that
¯φ and ¯ψ are mutually inverse. Thus they are isomorphisms and D(K, w) ∼= D(K′, w).
As an immediate application of Theorem 4.1, we obtain the following statement about
subdivisions of directed 2-complexes. Let K be a directed 2-complex and let f be its 2-cell. Let
us add a new edge e to the complex with ι(e) = ι(⌈f⌉) = ι(⌊f⌋) and τ(e) = τ(⌈f⌉) = τ(⌊f⌋),
remove the 2-cells f ±1, and add new 2-cells f ±1
1 , f ±1
2 , where f1, f2 have the form ⌈f⌉= e and
e = ⌊f⌋, respectively. This operation can be done for several positive 2-cells of K at once. This
simply means that we cut some 2-cells of K into two parts. The resulting directed 2-complex
K′ is called a subdivision of K.
Lemma 4.2. If K is a directed 2-complex, w is a non-empty 1-path in K and K′ is a subdivision
of K, then the diagram groups D(K, w) and D(K′, w) are isomorphic.
Proof. We use the notation from the paragraph preceding the formulation of the lemma. Let
K′′ be the directed 2-complex obtained from K by adding the edge e and the 2-cells f ±1
1 . By
part 1) of Theorem 4.1, D(K, w) = D(K′′, w). Now represent K′′ as the union of K1 and K2,
where K1, K2 have the same vertices and edges, K1 contains exactly two 2-cells f, f −1, and K2
contains all other 2-cells of K′′. Notice that ⌈f⌉is homotopic to e in K2 (because K2 contains
the 2-cell f1). Hence by part 2) of Theorem 4.1, we can replace f ±1 in K′′ by f ±1
2 , where f2
has the form e = ⌊f⌋without changing the diagram group with the base w. But the resulting
directed 2-complex is precisely K′. Hence D(K, w) ∼= D(K′, w).
As an immediate corollary of Lemma 4.2 we get the following statement.
Theorem 4.3. The classes of diagram groups over semigroup presentations and diagram groups
of directed 2-complexes coincide.
Proof. Notice that complexes of the form KP corresponding to semigroup presentations con-
sidered in [16] are precisely the directed 2-complexes with one vertex in which diﬀerent 2-cells
cannot have the same top and bottom paths. We have already mentioned that we can only
consider directed 2-complexes with one vertex (if we identify vertices we preserve existing dia-
gram groups but the set of diagram groups can increase since the set of 1-paths can increase).
12


It is obvious that if we subdivide each 2-cell of K twice (into three parts instead of two) then
we turn K into a KP for some P. It remains to apply Lemma 4.2.
5
Morphisms of complexes and universal diagram groups
Let K, K′ be directed 2-complexes. A morphism φ from K to K′ is a map that takes vertices
to vertices, edges to non-empty 1-paths and 2-cells to 2-paths and preserves the functions ι, τ,
⌈·⌉, ⌊·⌋, −1:
M1
For every edge e, φ(ι(e)) = ι(φ(e)), φ(τ(e)) = τ(φ(e)),
M2
For every 2-cell f of K, φ(⌈f⌉) = ⌈φ(f)⌉, φ(⌊f⌋) = ⌊φ(f)⌋; here for every 1-path p =
e1e2 · · · ek we set φ(p) = φ(e1)φ(e2) · · · φ(en), where ei are edges (the latter product exists
because of M1 ).
M3
For every 2-cell f of K, φ(f −1) = φ(f)−1.
Every morphism φ: K →K′ induces a functor from the category Π(K) to Π(K′): the image
of an atomic 2-path (p, f, q) is (φ(p), φ(f), φ(q)), where (u, δ1 ◦· · · ◦δn, v) for atomic 2-paths
δi = (pi, fi, qi) is short for (up1, f1, q1v) ◦· · · ◦(upn, fn, qnv).
A morphism φ: K →K′ also induces a functor from the diagram groupoid D(K) to D(K′).
The image of a (p, q)-diagram ∆over K is the (φ(p), φ(q))-diagram obtained from ∆by a)
replacing each edge that has label e by a path labelled by φ(e), and b) replacing each cell that
has label f by the diagram over K′ corresponding to the 2-path φ(f). Both of these functors will
be denoted by φ as well. The restriction of φ onto a diagram group D(K, p) is a homomorphism
that will be denoted by φp.
For a non-empty 1-path p in K, we say that a morphism φ: K →K′ is p-nonsingular if the
induced homomorphism φp is injective on D(K, p). In that case the subgroup φp(D(K, p)) of
D(K′) is called naturally embedded. If the morphism φ is p-nonsingular for every p, we call it
nonsingular.
Lemma 5.1. Let φ: K →K′ be a morphism of two directed 2-complexes.
1) If φ(δ) is reduced for every reduced 2-path δ, and φ(f) is not empty for every 2-cell f of
K, then φ is nonsingular.
2) Suppose that φ is injective on the set of 2-cells and φ(f) is a 2-cell for every 2-cell f of
K. Then φ is nonsingular.
3) If a directed 2-complex K′ is obtained by adding 2-cells to a directed 2-complex K, then
diagram groups of the form D(K, p) are naturally embedded into the diagram groups D(K′, p),
for every 1-path p.
4) If a directed 2-complex K′ is obtained by adding 2-cells to a directed 2-complex K, and
⌈f⌉is homotopic to ⌊f⌋in K for every 2-cell f ∈K′ \ K, then for every 1-path p in K, the
diagram group D(K, p) is a retract of the diagram group D(K′, p).
Proof. 1) Indeed, suppose that the kernel of φp is not trivial. Then it contains a reduced 2-path
δ ̸= p by Theorem 2.6. By the assumption, φ(δ) is reduced, and non-empty, so φp(δ) ̸= 1 by
Theorem 2.6, a contradiction.
2) It is easy to see that for every reduced (p, p)-diagram ∆, the diagram φp(∆) does not
contain dipoles. It remains to use part 1) of this lemma.
3) Immediately follows from 2).
13


4) The retraction ψ is given as follows. Fix a (⌈f⌉, ⌊f⌋)-diagram Γf over K for every 2-cell
f ∈K′ \ K in such a way that inverse diagrams correspond to inverse 2-cells. Then for every
(p, p)-diagram ∆over K′, the diagram ψ(∆) is obtained from ∆by inserting Γf instead of every
cell in ∆labelled by f ∈K \ K′. Clearly, ψ2 = ψ.
Let us call a directed 2-complex K universal if every ﬁnite or countable directed 2-complex
maps nonsingularly into K. A diagram group is called universal if it contains copies of all count-
able diagram groups. A directed 2-complex is said to be 2-path connected if all its non-empty
1-paths are homotopic to each other. By Theorem 3.4 it has at most one non-trivial diagram
group up to isomorphism. Notice that if a universal directed 2-complex is 2-path connected
then its nontrivial diagram group is universal because every at most countable diagram group
is (obviously) a diagram group of at most countable directed 2-complex.
Lemma 5.2. Let U be the directed 2-complex
⟨x | xm = xn, xm = xn, . . . for all 1 ≤m < n ⟩
(every equality appears countably many times). Then U is universal.
Proof. Let K be at most countable directed 2-complex and let K1 be obtained from K by
identifying all its edges and vertices. By φ we denote the natural morphism from K to K1.
Then φ is nonsingular by Lemma 5.1, part 2. It is easy to see that U can be obtained from K1
by adding 2-cells. Hence K1 is a subcomplex of U and φ: K →U is nonsingular by Lemma 5.1,
part 3.
We can simplify the universal directed 2-complex U by using part 2) of Theorem 4.1. For
every 1 ≤n ≤∞let
Hn = ⟨x | x2 = x, x = x, x = x, . . .
(n times) ⟩.
    ✒❅
❅
❅
❅
❘
✲
. . .
✲
✲
✲
✲
Figure 8.
This complex contains one vertex, one edge, and n+1 positive 2-cells, one of which is the Dunce
hat and all others are spheres. It is obtained from the plane diagram on Figure 8 by identifying
all edges according to their directions. For example, the complex H0 is the Dunce hat (see
Figure 1).
Lemma 5.3. The directed 2-complex H∞is universal. In particular, every countable diagram
group embeds into the diagram group D(H∞, x).
Proof. In fact we shall show that D(U, x) is isomorphic to D(H∞, x). Let us denote by Q the
complex obtained from U by removing the cell x2 = x and its inverse. Then H0 ∪Q = U. It is
easy to see that every non-empty 1-path in H0 is homotopic to x. Therefore, let us replace each
14


2-cell xm = xn in U by a cell x = x, and obtain a complex H∞. By part 2) of Theorem 4.1,
the diagram groups of U and H∞are isomorphic. The proof of part 2) of Theorem 4.1 actually
gives us a nonsingular morphism from U into H∞. It remains to use Lemma 5.2.
The diagram group D(H∞, x) is not even ﬁnitely generated (see Example 6.8 below).
Our next goal is to show that already the group D(H1, x) is universal. This will follow from
Lemma 5.3 and the fact that there exists a nonsingular morphism from H∞to H1. The group
D(H1, x) is ﬁnitely presented (see Example 6.8) and has a nice structure (see [19]).
Lemma 5.4. There exists a nonsingular morphism from H∞to H2.
Proof. Let us label the positive 2-cells of H∞by f0, f1, . . . , where f0 is the cell x2 = x. The
complex H2 has positive 2-cells f0, f1, f2. Consider the morphism φ from H∞to H2 which
takes the edge x to x, f0 to f0, and each fi, i ≥1, to the 2-path
(1, f1, 1)i ◦(1, f2, 1) ◦(1, f1, 1)i.
(8)
We need to show that φx is injective (then every φxk will be injective too because all local
groups in the diagram groupoid D(H∞) are conjugate by Corollary 3.5).
Indeed, let ∆be a nontrivial reduced diagram over H∞. Then ¯∆= φ(∆) is obtained by
replacing every cell with label fi by the diagram Γi corresponding to the 2-path (8) (see Figure
9) and each cell with label f −1
i
by the diagram Γ−1
i .
. . .
f1
f1
f2
. . .
f1
f1
Figure 9.
It is suﬃcient to show that ¯∆is also nontrivial. Any diagram over Hn (for any n) can be
uniquely decomposed into subdiagrams of the following two types. Each subdiagram of the ﬁrst
type is an (x2, x)-cell or its mirror image. Each subdiagram of the second type is a maximal
(x, x)-subdiagram, which is a product of (x, x)-cells only.
If we decompose ¯∆in such a way, then we see that each subdiagram of the second type is the
image of a subdiagram of the second type in ∆under the mapping φ. Since ∆has no dipoles,
each of its subdiagram of the second type is a product of (x, x)-cells, where the word formed
by their labels is a freely irreducible group word v over the alphabet {f ±1
i
| i ≥1}. Notice that
the φ-image of this subdiagram is a product of (x, x)-cells such that the word formed by their
inner labels is ¯v, where ¯fi = f i
1f2f i
1.
Since the map fi 7→¯fi is an embedding of the free group with generators fi (i ≥1) into the
free group with two generators f1, f2, the word ¯v will be non-empty after all free cancellations
are made in it. Thus if we reduce dipoles in each subdiagram of the second type in ¯∆, the
resulting diagram ∆′ will be reduced.
Indeed, we have cancelled all the dipoles formed by
(x, x)-cells.
No dipoles between cells that correspond to x2 = x may appear because each
15


subdiagram of the second type in ¯∆remains nontrivial after all cancellations. The diagram ∆′
contains the same number of cells labelled by f ±1
0
as ∆and at least as many (x, x)-cells as ∆.
Hence ∆′ is nontrivial.
Lemma 5.5. There exists a nonsingular morphism from H2 into H1.
Proof. The idea is similar to the one of the previous lemma. We keep notation for 2-cells of H2
from that lemma. Letters fi (i = 1, 2) will be also used to denote the atomic 2-paths (1, fi, 1)
and the corresponding (x, x)-diagrams that consist of one cell labelled by fi. By a we denote
any nontrivial reduced (x, x)-diagram over H0 = ⟨x | x2 = x ⟩and one of the corresponding
2-paths in H0. Any two (x, x)-diagrams can be concatenated. So each word in f ±1
1 , f ±1
2 , a±1
denotes some (x, x)-diagram.
Now we use the morphism ψ: H2 →H1 that takes the edge x to x, f1 to f1af1, f2 to f 2
1 af 2
1.
Let ∆be a nontrivial reduced diagram over H2. Let ˜∆be the diagram obtained from ψ(∆)
by cancelling all dipoles of (x, x)-cells. As in Lemma 5.4, we subdivide ∆into subdiagrams of
the two types. Let Γ be a subdiagram of the second type. It is a product of cells with inner
labels f ±1
1 , f ±1
2 . Let v be the word that is the product of these labels. Clearly, this is a freely
reduced word in f ±1
1 , f ±1
2 . After we replace v by ¯v, where ¯f1 = f1af1, ¯f2 = f 2
1 af 2
1 and then
freely reduce the result, we get a word of the form
f s0
1 ak1f s1
1 · · · akrf sr
1 ,
(9)
where r is the length of v. Note that s0 ̸= 0, sr ̸= 0, k1, . . . , kr = ±1. Note also that none
of the occurrences of letters a±1 in ¯v disappears after the reduction, hence only occurrences of
the letter f ±1
1
can disappear. Thus the ψ-image of any subdiagram of the second type after
cancelling all dipoles of (x, x)-cells becomes reduced and of the form (9) as well. After we cancel
all (x, x)-dipoles in the subdiagrams ψ(Γ) for all maximal subdiagrams Γ of ∆of the second
type, we would not have any more (x, x)-dipoles. Hence we shall get the diagram ˜∆.
Since s0 and sr are always non-zero, the 2-cells labelled by f ±1
0
cannot form a dipole in
˜∆. Therefore, ˜∆is reduced. Since the number of cells in ˜∆is at least the same as in ∆, the
diagram ˜∆is nontrivial.
Theorem 5.6. The directed 2-complex H1 is universal. Hence the group G1 = D(H1, x) contains
copies of all countable diagram groups. This group is ﬁnitely presented and even of type F∞.
Proof. The ﬁrst statement follows from Lemmas 5.3, 5.4, 5.5. The fact that the group G1 is
of type F∞follows from Theorem 9.3 below. It can also be deduced from results of [14]. In
Example 6.8 below, we shall compute a presentation of G1. It has 6 generators and 18 deﬁning
relations.
Theorem 5.6 gives an example of a universal directed 2-complex with one edge and two
positive 2-cells. The following theorem shows that a complex with one edge and one positive
2-cell can be universal as well.
Theorem 5.7. The directed 2-complex V = ⟨y | y3 = y2 ⟩is universal (this complex is obtained
from Figure 10 by identifying all edges according to their directions). Its diagram group D(V, y2)
is also a universal group of type F∞. It has the following Thompson-like presentation:
⟨x0, x1, . . . , y0, y1, . . . | xxi
j = xj+1, yxi
j = yi+1, 0 ≤i < j −1 ⟩.
16


s
s
s
s
s
   ✒
   ❅
❅
❅
❘
❅
❅
❅
✲
✲
✲
Figure 10.
Proof. Let us consider the two diagrams A and B over V on Figure 11. Here A is a (y8, y4)-
diagram and B is a (y4, y4)-diagram. These diagrams correspond to the following 2-paths on V.
Let pi,j (i, j ≥0) denote the atomic 2-path (yi, y3 = y2, yj). Then A corresponds to the 2-path
α = p−1
33 p15p41p04p30p11, whereas B corresponds to β = p01p−1
10 . Let us consider the morphism
γ from H1 to V which takes the edge x to the 1-path y4, the 2-cell f0 to α, and the 2-cell f1
to β. We are going to show that γ is nonsingular. As before, it is enough to show that it is
x-nonsingular.
Let ∆be any reduced (x, x)-diagram over H1. The diagram γ(∆) is obtained as follows.
First we subdivide each edge labelled by x into 4 parts and label each of them by y. Then
each (x2, x)-cell becomes a (y8, y4)-cell. Every (x2, x)-cell with inner label f0 is replaced by A.
A mirror image of such a cell is replaced by A−1. Similarly, any (x, x)-cell of ∆becomes a
(y4, y4)-cell, so we replace by B±1 all (x, x)-cells labelled by f ±1
1 . After all these replacements,
we get a (y4, y4)-diagram ˆ∆over V.
We shall show that ˆ∆is reduced, and then apply Lemma 5.1, part 1). Note that each of the
diagrams A, B has no dipoles so a dipole in ˆ∆, if it occurs, must belong to diﬀerent subdiagrams
of the form A±1, B±1. Suppose that the upper cell of the dipole is contained in A±1. From the
structure of A it is obvious that this cell must be a (y3, y2)-cell. So it cannot form a dipole with
a cell from B±1. The lower cell of the dipole is a (y2, y3)-cell.
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
s
Figure 11.
There are two types of vertices in ˆ∆. Vertices of the ﬁrst type (we call them red) are the
images of vertices of ∆. The other vertices are called green. It is easy to see that B has only
two red vertices, ι(B) and τ(B). The diagram A has exactly three red vertices: ι(A), τ(A), and
the middle point of the top path of A. The middle point of the bottom path of A is green. So
we have to consider two cases for the two cells that form the dipole. In the ﬁrst case the middle
point of the common part of the boundary of the cells forming a dipole is red, in the second
case it is green.
In the ﬁrst case the upper cell of the dipole is contained in a copy of A−1 and the lower cell
is contained in a copy of A. Denote these copies by Γ1, Γ2, respectively. We claim that the
bottom path of Γ1 coincides with the top path of Γ2. Indeed, Γ1 is the γ-image of an (x, x2)-cell
π1 in ∆and Γ2 is the γ image of an (x2, x)-cell π2 in ∆. The bottom path of π1 was subdivided
into 8 parts. The same is true for the top path of π2. The product of the 4th and the 5th of
these parts is the same for both π1 and π2 since it is the common boundary of the cells forming
the dipole. This can happen only if the bottom path of π1 coincides with the top path of π2.
But in this case we have a dipole in ∆. This contradicts the assumption that ∆is reduced.
17


In the second case the upper cell of the dipole is contained in a copy of A and the lower cell
is contained in a copy of A−1. We also denote these copies by Γ1, Γ2, respectively. The bottom
path of Γ1 is the image of an edge in ∆. This edge is subdivided into 4 parts. The product of its
second and third part is the common boundary of the cells of the dipole. The same is true for
the top path of Γ2. So the bottom of Γ1 coincides with the top of Γ2 since they must be images
of the same edge in ∆. In this case an (x2, x)-cell forms a dipole in ∆with an (x, x2)-cell, a
contradiction.
If the lower cell of the dipole is contained in A±1, then the same arguments are applied. So
to ﬁnish the proof, let us assume that the dipole in ˆ∆is formed by two cells that are contained
in copies of B±1. Suppose that the upper cell of the dipole belongs to a copy of B. Thus it is
a (y2, y3)-cell. Note that the leftmost point of it is green and the rightmost point is red. The
lower cell must be a (y3, y2)-cell with the corresponding points of the same colour. Thus the
lower cell is contained in a copy of B−1. As in the previous paragraph, we see from this fact
that the last 3 of 4 sections of some edges in ∆coincide. Then these edges also coincide and
so ∆has a dipole that consists of two (x, x)-cells. The case when the upper cell of the dipole
belongs to a copy of B−1 is quite analogous. Thus γ is nonsingular.
That diagram groups of V are of type F∞follows directly from [14]. The presentation of
D(V, y2) is found in [16, page 114]. It can be found using Theorem 6.5 below.
In the next section we shall construct a universal directed 2-complex whose diagram groups
have very simple presentations.
6
Presentations of diagram groups
In [16, Section 9], we showed how to ﬁnd nice presentations of diagram groups of the so called
complete string rewriting systems. Here we shall generalize these results for diagram groups of
directed 2-complexes.
We start with a deﬁnition of a complete directed 2-complex. Throughout this section, K is
a directed 2-complex with the set of edges E, set of 2-cells F and a ﬁxed set of positive 2-cells
F+.
Let p, q be 1-paths in K. We write p +
→q if p ̸= q and there exists a positive 2-path δ with
⌈δ⌉= p and ⌊δ⌋= q.
We say that K is Noetherian if every sequence of 1-paths p1
+
→p2
+
→· · · terminates.
We say that K is conﬂuent, if for every two positive 2-paths δ1, δ2 with ⌈δ1⌉= ⌈δ2⌉there
exist two positive 2-paths δ1 ◦δ′
1 and δ2 ◦δ′
2 such that ⌊δ′
1⌋= ⌊δ′
2⌋. In that case we say that δ1
and δ2 can be extended to a diamond.
If a directed 2-complex is Noetherian and conﬂuent, then we say that K is complete.
It is easy to see that if K = KP for some complete string rewriting system P, then K is
complete.
Let δ1, δ2 be two positive atomic 2-paths on K. Assume that ⌈δi⌉̸= ⌊δi⌋for each i = 1, 2.
Suppose that one of the two cases hold:
1. δ1 = (1, f1, q), δ2 = (p, f2, 1), where ⌈f1⌉= ps, ⌈f2⌉= sq for some non-empty 1-path s;
2. ⌈f2⌉is a subpath of ⌈f1⌉and f1 ̸= f2.
Then we say that δ1 and δ2 form a critical pair. The diagrams representing these cases are
shown on Figure 12.
18


f −1
1
f2
p
s
q
f −1
1
f2
✻δ1
❄
δ2
✻δ1
❄
δ2
Figure 12.
We say that the critical pair can be resolved if it can be extended to a diamond.
For string rewriting systems, it is known (Newman’s lemma [16]) that a Noetherian string
rewriting system is complete if and only if every critical pair can be resolved. One can similarly
prove that a Noetherian directed 2-complex is complete if and only if every critical pair of its
positive atomic 2-paths can be resolved.
A 1-path p in a complete directed 2-complex K is called irreducible if p +
→q is impossible
(that is, p cannot be changed by any positive 2-path). It is easy to see that every 1-path p in
a complete directed 2-complex K is homotopic to a unique irreducible 1-path ¯p, which is called
the irreducible form of p.
From Lemma 5.1, part 4), one can almost immediately deduce the following important
statement.
Lemma 6.1. Every diagram group of a directed 2-complex K is a retract of a diagram group
of a complete directed 2-complex K′ ⊇K. The number of classes of homotopic 1-paths in K′ is
the same as in K. If K is ﬁnite and it has ﬁnitely many classes of homotopic 1-paths, then K′
is also ﬁnite.
Proof. Let G = D(K, p). Let us ﬁx some total well ordering on the set of edges of K. Then we
can introduce the ShortLex order on 1-paths of K.
Let us change the orientation on the set of 2-cells of K as follows. For every positive cell
f ∈K, if ⌈f⌉is smaller than ⌊f⌋in ShortLex, we call f negative and f −1 positive.
This
operation does not change the diagram groups of the 2-complex and the classes of homotopic
1-paths (see Remark 2.3).
In every class W of homotopic 1-paths of K choose the ShortLex smallest 1-path p(W). Now
add cells to K as follows. First for every edge e in K, we add a positive 2-cell fe of the form
e = p(W), where W is the class of homotopic 1-paths containing e. We also add the inverse of
that 2-cell. Now let U and V be two classes of homotopic 1-paths in K such that the product
p(U)p(V ) exists (that is, τ(p(U)) = ι(p(V ))) and let W be the class of homotopic 1-paths that
contains p(U)p(V ). Add a positive cell fU,V with top path p(U)p(V ) and bottom path p(W)
(also add the corresponding negative 2-cell). As a result of these operations, the number of
classes of homotopic 1-paths does not change.
The resulting complex K′ is clearly Noetherian. Indeed, for every positive 2-cell f of K′,
⌈f⌉≥⌊f⌋in the ShortLex order.
Every 1-path of a class W is connected to p(W) by a positive 2-path, which consists of
atomic 2-paths corresponding to the cells of the form fe and fU,V . (This can be easily proved
by induction on the length of the 1-path.) Hence the complex K′ is conﬂuent. Indeed, for every
two positive atomic 2-paths δ1, δ2 in K with ⌈δ1⌉= ⌈δ2⌉, their bottom 1-paths are homotopic.
So one can reduce each of them to the same 1-path and complete the diamond. Thus K′ is a
complete directed 2-complex.
19


The complex K′ is also conﬂuent. Indeed, for every two positive atomic 2-paths δ1, δ2 in K
with ⌈δ1⌉= ⌈δ2⌉, the 1-paths ⌊δ1⌋and ⌊δ2⌋are in the same class W of homotopic 1-paths. Now
using the new cells fe and fU,V , one can reduce each of these 1-paths to p(W) and complete the
diamond. Thus K′ is a complete directed 2-complex.
By Lemma 5.1, part 4), G is a retract of D(K′, p).
The last statement of the theorem
obviously holds because we add only ﬁnitely many cells.
Since we are looking for nice presentations of diagram groups, which are fundamental groups
of Squier complexes, it is natural to start with ﬁnding nice spanning forests in Sq(K). It can
be done in the case when K is complete (and in some other cases which we do not discuss
here). Recall that a spanning forest of a 1-complex S is a forest whose intersection with every
connected component of S is a spanning tree in that component.
Deﬁnition 6.2. Let K be a complete directed 2-complex. A spanning forest T in Sq(K) is
called a left forest whenever the following two conditions hold:
F1
for any edge e = (p, f, q) in T, the 1-path p is irreducible;
F2
if an edge e = (p, f, q) belongs to T, then any edge of the form (p, f, q′) also belongs to T.
Analogously one can deﬁne a right forest.
Because of the property F2, we will often use the notation (u, f, ∗) when we mention an
edge of a left forest. Analogously, (∗, f, v) will be used for edges from a right forest.
Lemma 6.3. If K is a complete directed 2-complex, then Sq(K) has a left forest and a right
forest.
Proof. In each connected component of Sq(K) we choose the vertex which is an irreducible 1-
path. If p is not irreducible, then we ﬁnd its shortest initial segment p′, which is not irreducible.
Let p = p′v for some v. By deﬁnition, p′ can be reduced so it has a subpath of the form ⌊f⌋for
some negative cell f of K, where ⌊f⌋̸= ⌈f⌉(there are possibly many ways to choose f with the
above properties but we choose one of them arbitrarily). Obviously, this subpath is a suﬃx of
p′. Hence p′ = u ⌊f⌋, where u must be irreducible. Thus to every vertex p of Sq(K) that is not
reducible, we can assign an edge e = (u, f, v). Let us consider the subgraph T of the 1-skeleton
of Sq(K) that contains all vertices and all the edges of the form e±1, where e was assigned to
some p. We leave it as an exercise for the reader to check that T is a spanning forest and that
it satisﬁes conditions F1, F2 (see the proof of [16, Lemma 9.4]). A right forest in Sq(K) is
constructed in a similar way.
Remark 6.4. Let K be a complete directed 2-complex. In general, the way to construct a left
(right) forest from the proof of Lemma 6.3 is not unique. However, if the second case of the
critical pair from its deﬁnition never occurs (that will be the case in all the examples considered
below), then it is not diﬃcult to prove that the left forest in Sq(K) is unique and consists of
all edges (u, f, v)±1, where f ∈F−, ⌊f⌋̸= ⌈f⌉, and every proper initial subpath of u ⌊f⌋is
irreducible.
Let us ﬁx a left forest Tl and a right forest Tr in Sq(K). Then for every vertex p in Sq(K),
where p ̸= ¯p, there exists a unique negative edge e ∈Tl (resp., e ∈Tr) going into p. Indeed,
otherwise there would be two diﬀerent paths in Tl (resp., Tr) that consist of positive edges and
connect p with ¯p. We shall say that e is assigned to p.
20


The following theorem is a translation of [16, Theorem 9.5]. It gives a Wirtinger-like pre-
sentation of any diagram group of a complete directed 2-complex. The translation of the proof
from [16] is straightforward.
Theorem 6.5. Let K be a complete directed 2-complex with the set of negative 2-cells F−, and
a distinguished non-empty 1-path w. Then the diagram group D(K, w) admits the following
presentation. The generating set S consists of all the negative edges in Sq(K, w) excluding edges
from the left forest Tl. The deﬁning relations are all relations of the form3
(p, f1, q ⌊f2⌋r) = (p, f1, q ⌈f2⌉r)(p⌈f1⌉q,f2,r)
(10)
if the edge e = (p ⌈f1⌉q, f2, r) is not in Tl, or of the form
(p, f1, q ⌊f2⌋r) = (p, f1, q ⌈f2⌉r)
(11)
if e ∈Tl. Here f1, f2 ∈F−, and all edges involved in these relations are from the generating set
S.
In most cases, this presentation can be simpliﬁed.
As in [16], with every negative edge (u, f, v) in Sq(K) we associate a group word [u, f, v] in
the alphabet of negative edges of Sq(K) and their inverses, deﬁned by the Noetherian induction
on the strict order generated by +
→and the relation suﬀ, where (u, u′) ∈suﬀif and only if u′
is a proper suﬃx of u:
• If u ̸= ¯u, then [u, f, v] = [¯u, f, v].
• If u = ¯u and (u, f, v) is in Tl, then [u, f, v] = 1.
• If u = ¯u, v = ¯v and (u, f, v) is not in Tl, then [u, f, v] = (u, f, v).
• If u = ¯u, v ̸= ¯v and (u, f, v) is not in Tl, then take the negative edge (p, g, q) from the right
forest Tr that is assigned to v (thus, g ∈F−, v = p ⌊g⌋q, and q = ¯q). By the induction
hypothesis, we can assume that the word [u, f, p ⌈g⌉q] is already deﬁned. Then let
[u, f, v] = [u, f, p ⌈g⌉q][u⌈f⌉p,g,q]
.
Notice that every letter (or its inverse) in any word [u, f, v] has the form (p, g, q), where p,
q are irreducible, g ∈F−, and (p, g, q) is not in Tl.
Finally, let us present the translation of [16, Theorem 9.8] into the language of directed
2-complexes (we are correcting some misprints in the formulation of that theorem as well). The
translation of the proof of that theorem is straightforward.
Theorem 6.6. Let K be a complete directed 2-complex and let w be a non-empty 1-path in K.
The group D(K, w) is generated by the set X of all edges (u, f, v) in Sq(K, w), where u, v are
irreducible, f ∈F −, and (u, f, v) is not in the left forest Tl, subject to the following deﬁning
relations:
[p, f1, q ⌊f2⌋r] = [p, f1, q ⌈f2⌉r][p⌈f1⌉q,f2,r],
(12)
where
3Here and below xy means y−1xy.
21


• f1, f2 ∈F −,
• p, q, r are irreducible,
• p ⌈f1⌉q ⌈f2⌉r is homotopic to w in K,
• (p, f1, ∗) is not in Tl and (∗, f2, r) is not in Tr.
Remark 6.7. a) Notice that every relation in Theorem 6.6 is a conjugacy relation of the form
xy = xz for some generator x and words y, z. Therefore, the set X in Theorem 6.6 is a minimal
generating set of the diagram group (because it freely generates the abelianization of D(K, w)).
In Section 9 we will show that the number of deﬁning relations given by Theorem 6.6 is also
minimal possible.
b) One can check that in the formulation of Theorem 6.6, we can replace Tr by Tl. The
numbers of generators and relations will be the same (see Remark 9.8 below), but the relations
in general will be more complicated.
Example 6.8. As we mentioned before, the directed 2-complex Hn is complete for every n.
This complex has only two irreducible 1-paths, 1 and x. Let g0 be the negative 2-cell of Hn of
the form x = x2 and let g1, g2, . . . , gn be the negative 2-cells of Hn of the form x = x. Then
the left forest consists of edges of the form (1, g0, ∗)±1. The right forest consists of edges of the
form (∗, g0, 1)±1.
By Theorem 6.6, the diagram group D(Hn, x) is generated by the edges of the forms (x, g0, 1),
(x, g0, x), and (p, gi, q), 1 ≤i ≤n, where p, q ∈{1, x} (the number of generators is 4n+2) subject
to the conjugacy relations (12), where there are 2n+1 choices for the pair (p, f1), 2n+1 choices
for the pair (f2, r), and q can be equal to 1 or x (the number of relations is 2(2n + 1)2).
In particular, if n = ∞, the diagram group is not ﬁnitely generated. For any integer n,
the group D(Hn, x) is ﬁnitely presented. In case n = 0, it has two generators x0 = (x, g0, 1),
x1 = (x, g0, x) and two deﬁning relations xx2
0
1 = xx0x1
1
, xx3
0
1 = xx2
0x1
1
. This is one of the classical
presentations of R. Thompson’s group F [13]. In case n = 1 we get a presentation of the group
G1 with 6 generators and 18 deﬁning relations.
Now we are going to use Theorems 6.5 and 6.6 to give an example of a universal diagram
group with a very simple presentation.
Theorem 6.9. Let K = ⟨a, y | ay = a, y3 = y2 ⟩. Then K is a universal directed 2-complex.
The group H = D(K, a) is universal. It can be given by the following Thompson-like group
presentation
⟨x0, x1, x2, . . . | xxi
j = xj+1, 0 ≤i < j −1 ⟩.
(13)
The group H also has the following ﬁnite presentation with three generators and six deﬁning
relations:
⟨x0, x1, x2 | xxi
0
2 = xxi−1
0
x1
2
(i = 2, 3, 4), xxj
0
2 = xxj−1
0
x2
2
(j = 3, 4, 5) ⟩.
(14)
Proof. It is easy to see that K contains V, whence K is universal, and D(V, y2) is embedded
into D(K, y2). Hence D(K, y2) contains copies of all countable diagram groups. By Corollary
3.6, D(K, a) × D(K, y2) is embedded into D(K, ay2). Since ay2 and a are homotopic in K, by
Corollary 3.5, we can conclude that D(K, y2) is embedded into D(K, a). Hence D(K, a) also
contains copies of all countable diagram groups.
It is easy to check that the directed 2-complex K is complete.
22


Theorem 6.5 implies that H can be generated by the edges of the form (u, a = ay, v) or
(u, y2 = y3, v), where u, v are 1-paths in K, u is irreducible, and uav (resp., uy2v) is homotopic
to a in K.
If uav is homotopic to a, then clearly u is empty, which implies that (u, a = ay, v) is in the
left forest. Hence H is generated by the edges of the form (u, y2 = y3, v) only. If (u, y2 = y3, v)
is one of our generators, then uy2v must be homotopic to a. Then u = ayk, v = yl for some
k, l ≥0. Since u must be an irreducible 1-path, we have k = 0. So this generator has the
form (a, y2 = y3, yl). We denote it by xl. By Theorem 6.5 the deﬁning relations of H are the
following
(a, y2 = y3, vy3w) = (a, y2 = y3, vy2w)(ay2v,y2=y3,w).
Note that ay2v = a. Let i = |w|, j = |vy2w| = i + 2 + |v|. Then our deﬁning relation has the
form xj+1 = xxi
j , where j ≥i + 2. This leads to (13).
To describe a ﬁnite presentation of H, we use Theorem 6.6.
Our set of generators now
consists of the elements xj = (a, y2 = y3, yj), where j = 0, 1, 2 since the word yj is irreducible.
The deﬁning relations have the form
[a, y2 = y3, py3q] = [a, y2 = y3, py2q][a,y2=y3,q]
since ay2p = a, where the words p, q are irreducible. Also we have a restriction that (a, y2 =
y3, q) is not in the right forest. Hence q is non-empty. Therefore p = 1, y, y2 and q = y, y2.
Let zj = [a, y2 = y3, yj]. According to Deﬁnition 6.2, zj can be expressed as follows in terms
of the generators: z0 = (a, y2 = y3, 1) = x0, z1 = x1, z2 = x2, z3 = [a, y2 = y3, y3] = [a, y2 =
y3, y2][a,y2=y3,1] = xx0
2
and analogously z4 = zz0
3
= xx2
0
2 , z5 = xx3
0
2 , and so on. Thus we have 6
deﬁning relations in terms of the zj’s: z4 = zz1
3 , z5 = zz1
4 , z6 = zz1
5 , z5 = zz2
4 , z6 = zz2
5 , z7 = zz2
6 .
If we now rewrite them in terms of the generators x0, x1, x2, we obtain (14).
7
Rooted 2-trees
We shall need a special class of directed 2-complexes called rooted 2-trees, which are 2-dimen-
sional analogs of rooted trees. Let w be a simple arc subdivided into subarcs (edges). One
can regard w as a directed 2-complex with no 2-cells. Let us denote it by K0. Consider any
ascending family of directed 2-complexes
K0 ⊆K1 ⊆K2 ⊆· · · ⊆Kn ⊆· · ·
(15)
obtained by the following inductive procedure. For every n ≥0, in order to construct Kn+1,
we add new 2-cells to Kn. For each positive 2-cell f from Kn+1 \ Kn, the top 1-path ⌈f⌉must
belong to Kn and the bottom 1-path ⌊f⌋must be a simple arc that meets Kn at the endpoints
only. We also assume that the arcs of the form ⌊f⌋, for all positive 2-cells from Kn+1 \ Kn, are
disjoint except for their endpoints.
Then the union K = S
n≥0 Kn is a directed 2-complex called a rooted 2-tree (with the root
1-path w).
We say that 1-paths p, q of a directed 2-complex have the same endpoints if ι(p) = ι(q),
τ(p) = τ(q).
Let us consider the following three conditions for a directed 2-complex K and a distinguished
1-path w in it:
T1
For any vertex o of K, there exist a 1-path from ι(w) to τ(w) containing o.
23


T2
Every two 1-paths in K with the same endpoints are homotopic in K.
T3
The diagram group D(K, w) is trivial.
Lemma 7.1. Any rooted 2-tree K with the root w satisﬁes conditions T1 – T3.
Proof. Let K be constructed using the ascending chain (15). It is easy to see that K satisﬁes
the conditions T1 – T3 provided each Kn (n ≥0) does.
We proceed by induction on n. All three conditions are obvious for K0. So for n ≥0, assume
that Kn satisﬁes conditions T1 – T3.
Let us check that Kn+1 satisﬁes T1 – T3. If o is a vertex that belongs to Kn+1 \ Kn then it
belongs to the bottom path ⌊f⌋of some positive 2-cell f. The endpoints of ⌊f⌋belong to Kn
so there are 1-paths q′, q′′ in Kn from ι(w) to ι(f) and from τ(f) to τ(w), respectively. Hence
the 1-path q′ ⌊f⌋q′′ contains o. Therefore, T1 holds for Kn+1.
To check T2, let us consider 1-paths p, q in Kn+1, where ι(p) = ι(q), τ(p) = τ(q). Let
ρn(s) denote the number of edges in s that belong to Kn+1 \ Kn. We proceed by induction on
ρn(p) + ρn(q). If this number is zero, then both 1-paths belong to Kn so they are homotopic.
So we can assume that ρn(q) ̸= 0. This means that q contains an edge e from Kn+1 \ Kn. The
edge e is contained in the bottom 1-path v = ⌊f⌋of a positive 2-cell f ̸∈Kn such that u = ⌈f⌉
belongs to Kn. By deﬁnition, no edges of v belong to Kn. Notice that by deﬁnition, the graph
Kn+1 is obtained from Kn by adding a union of simple arcs of the form ⌊g⌋, g ∈Kn+1 \Kn which
are pairwise disjoint except for the endpoints. Therefore, every 1-path in Kn+1 that connects
two vertices in Kn and contains e, must contain the whole 1-path v = ⌊f⌋. Hence q contains v.
Thus we can represent q in the form q′vq′′. Therefore, q is homotopic to the 1-path r = q′uq′′.
Since (by deﬁnition) u is contained in Kn, we have ρn(r) < ρn(q). By the inductive assumption,
the 1-paths p and r are homotopic in Kn+1. So p and q are also homotopic, that is, T2 holds
for Kn+1.
It remains to check T3.
Suppose that the group D(Kn+1, w) is not trivial.
Then there
exists a reduced nontrivial (w, w)-diagram ∆over Kn+1. If all labels of the cells in ∆belong
to Kn, then ∆is a diagram over Kn and so it represents a nontrivial element of D(Kn, w), a
contradiction. So let π be a cell in ∆that belongs to Kn+1 but not to Kn. Without loss of
generality, the label f of π is a positive 2-cell f ∈Kn+1. Since ⌊f⌋is a simple arc in Kn+1, the
path in ∆labelled by v must be the common boundary of π and a cell of the form ⌊f⌋= ⌈f⌉.
The only possible label of this cell is f −1. Thus ∆has a dipole, a contradiction.
Now we are going to prove the converse to Lemma 7.1. This gives a characterization of
rooted 2-trees.
Theorem 7.2. Let K be a directed 2-complex and let w be a 1-path in it. Then K satisﬁes the
conditions T1 – T3 if and only if K is a rooted 2-tree with the root w.
Proof. The “if” part is given by Lemma 7.1. To prove the “only if” part, let us deﬁne a sequence
(15) of subcomplexes in K. Notice that by T2, any 1-path in K is a simple arc because an empty
1-path cannot be homotopic to a nonempty 1-path. Hence we can set K0 to be equal to the
simple arc w. If Kn is already deﬁned for some n ≥0, let Kn+1 be the subcomplex formed by
Kn and all the 2-cells f ̸∈Kn such that ⌈f⌉is contained in Kn. Conditions T1 and T2 guarantee
that K is equal to the union of the Kn, n ≥0. By deﬁnition, it is enough to show that each of
the directed 2-complexes Kn (n ≥0) is a rooted 2-tree with w as the root.
24


So we prove that Kn is a rooted 2-tree (with w as the root) by induction on n ≥0. This is
obvious if n = 0. So we assume that Kn is a rooted 2-tree and prove the same for Kn+1.
In fact a stronger claim is true: for every subcomplex M of K, which is a rooted 2-tree with
root w, and any positive 2-cell f ∈K\M with ⌈f⌉in M, no internal points of ⌊f⌋can belong to
M. (Clearly, if this claim is true, then the directed 2-complex M′ obtained from M by adding
f, is again a rooted 2-tree with root w. Since Kn+1 can be obtained from Kn by adding 2-cells
one by one, the claim implies that Kn+1 is a rooted 2-tree.)
By contradiction, let f be a 2-cell in K \ M, where ⌈f⌉is contained in M. Suppose that
there exists an internal vertex o of ⌊f⌋that belongs to M. Since (by Lemma 7.1) M satisﬁes
T1, we can ﬁnd a 1-path p in M from ι(w) to τ(w) that is subdivided by o into a product
of two factors, p = p′p′′. Since the endpoints ι(f), τ(f) are also in M, there exist 1-paths q′
(respectively, q′′) in M from ι(w) to ι(f) (from τ(f) to ι(w)). The 1-path v = ⌊f⌋is subdivided
by o into a product of the form v = v′v′′. Now we have two 1-paths p′ and q′v′ that go from
ι(w) to o. By T2, they are homotopic in K. Let ∆′ be a (q′v′, p)-diagram over K. Analogously,
there exists a (v′′q′′, p′′)-diagram ∆′′ over K. Now we can form a (w, w)-diagram ∆over K as
follows. The 1-paths p′p′′ and q′uq′′ belong to M and have the same endpoints as w. Since M
satisﬁes T2, there exists a (w, q′uq′′)-diagram ∆1 and a (p′p′′, w)-diagram ∆2. Both of them are
diagrams over M. Now let
∆= ∆1 ◦(ε(q′) + π + ε(q′′)) ◦(∆′ + ∆′′) ◦∆2,
where π is a cell of ∆labelled by f.
Suppose that ∆has a cell labelled by f −1. This cell cannot belong to ∆1 or ∆2 because
they are diagrams over M. Then this cell is in ∆′ or in ∆′′. These cases are symmetric so let
π′ be a cell of ∆′ labelled by f −1. There is a (directed) path in ∆from τ(π′) to τ(∆′). Let us
extend it by the path labelled by v′′ from τ(∆′) to τ(π). If we project the resulting path into
K, then we get a loop at τ(f). This contradicts T2. Thus ∆contains no cells labelled by f −1.
Therefore, after reducing all the dipoles in ∆, we get a nontrivial reduced (w, w)-diagram over
K which contradicts T3.
Given a rooted 2-tree K, the ascending sequence Kn (n ≥0) of rooted 2-trees deﬁned in the
proof of Theorem 7.2, will be called the natural ﬁltration of K. Notice that for each 2-cell f of
K, there exists a unique n ≥1 such that f or its inverse has the form u = v, where u belongs
to Kn and v is a simple arc in Kn+1 \ Kn. This allows us to choose the natural orientation on
the set of 2-cells of K: we call f positive if ⌈f⌉is contained in Kn but ⌊f⌋is not contained in
Kn (for some n ≥0).
8
Universal 2-covers of directed 2-complexes
Let K be a directed 2-complex. Consider any directed 2-complex M and a morphism φ: M →K
that sends edges to edges and 2-cells to 2-cells. For every edge or 2-cell, its image under φ will be
called its label. In this situation, we shall call M a directed 2-complex over K. The morphism φ
will be sometimes called a labelling map. For every 1-path p in M, the set of all atomic 2-paths
in M with top p will be called the 2-star of p. Clearly, for any 1-path p in M, we have an
induced map from the 2-star of p into the 2-star of φ(p). This induced map will be called the
local map of M at p.
Let p be any 1-path in K. A universal 2-cover of K with base p is a directed 2-complex M
over K with a labelling map φ which satisfy the following properties:
25


U1
M is a rooted 2-tree with root ˜p, where φ(˜p) = p;
U2
for any 1-path ˜q in M from ι(˜p) to τ(˜p), the local map of M at ˜q is bijective.
The following theorem shows the existence and uniqueness of universal 2-covers. We say
that two directed 2-complexes over K are isomorphic whenever there exists an isomorphism
between these complexes that preserves all labels.
Theorem 8.1. For every directed 2-complex K and every 1-path p in K, there exists a universal
2-cover of K with base p. Every two universal 2-covers of K with base p are isomorphic.
Proof. Let us construct a directed 2-complex M over K deﬁned as a rooted 2-tree with natural
ﬁltration M0 ⊆M1 ⊆M2 ⊆· · ·, and the labelling map φ. Both Mn and φ are deﬁned by
induction on n.
By deﬁnition, M0 is a simple arc ˜p subdivided into subarcs (edges) and labelled by p. The
labelling of ˜p gives the restriction of φ onto M0.
Suppose that a rooted 2-tree Mn with root ˜p and the restriction φ onto Mn are already
deﬁned for some n ≥0.
Let us consider all pairs of the form (˜r, f), where ˜r is a 1-path in Mn and f is a 2-cell of K
such that ⌈f⌉= φ(˜r). Suppose that Mn does not have a 2-cell labelled by f whose top path
is ˜r. Then we add a new 2-cell ˜f to Mn as follows. First we add a simple arc ˜s with the same
endpoints as ˜r, subdivide it into subarcs and label it by ⌊f⌋. Then we add a 2-cell ˜f of the form
˜r = ˜s, labelled by f. (Note that ˜f depends on the pair (˜r, f).) Applying this operation to all
possible pairs (˜r, f) as above, we obtain Mn+1 and the restriction of the labelling function φ
on Mn+1. We assume that all the new arcs we add are disjoint from each other and from Mn,
except for their endpoints. Clearly then, Mn+1 is a rooted 2-tree with root ˜p.
By deﬁnition, M = S
n≥0 Mn is also a rooted 2-tree with root ˜p so it satisﬁes U1. We claim
that M satisﬁes the following property
U2′
for any 1-path ˜r in M and for any 2-cell f of K such that ⌈f⌉= φ(˜r), there is exactly one
2-cell ˜f of M labelled by f with top path ˜r.
Indeed, let n ≥0 be the smallest integer such that ˜r is contained in Mn. If there is no 2-cell
˜f labelled by f with top path ˜r in Mn, then such a 2-cell will appear in Mn+1 by deﬁnition.
Let us prove by induction that for any n ≥0, there is at most one cell ˜f in Mn labelled
by f with the given top 1-path ˜r. If n = 0, then M0 has no 2-cells at all. Suppose that our
assumption is true for Mn. By the deﬁnition of Mn+1, if Mn has a 2-cell labelled by f with
top ˜r, then no 2-cell with the same properties appears in Mn+1. Otherwise, only one such a
2-cell may appear. Hence our claim is true for Mn+1.
Now let us take any 1-path ˜q in M with the same endpoints as ˜p. We prove that the local
map of M at ˜q is surjective. Suppose that δ belongs to the 2-star of q = φ(˜q) in K. Then
δ = (u, f, v) for some 1-paths u, v in K and some 2-cell f. We also have q = ⌈δ⌉= u ⌈f⌉v. The
1-path ˜q can be decomposed as ˜q = ˜u˜r˜v, where φ(˜u) = u, φ(˜r) = ⌈f⌉, φ(˜v) = v. Since property
U2′ holds for M, the complex M has a 2-cell ˜f labelled by f with top ˜r. So the atomic 2-path
˜δ = (˜u, ˜f, ˜v) belongs to the 2-star of ˜q and maps onto δ under φ.
Now we need to prove that the local map of M at ˜q is injective. Assume the contrary.
Then there are two diﬀerent atomic 2-paths in M with the same top ˜q and the same image
δ = (u, f, v) in K. In this case the 2-cells of these atomic 2-paths are also diﬀerent. But they
have the same top ˜r and the same label f, which contradicts U2′.
26


We proved that the local map of M at any 1-path from ι(˜p) to τ(˜p) is bijective, that is,
property U2 holds. So M is a universal 2-cover of K with base p.
Now let us prove the uniqueness. Suppose that M′ is a universal 2-cover of K with base p.
We will show that M′ and M are isomorphic as directed 2-complexes over K.
First of all, let us show that M′ also satisﬁes U2′. If ˜r is a 1-path in M′ such that ⌈f⌉= φ(˜r)
for some 2-cell f in K, then we can include ˜r into a 1-path ˜q = ˜u˜r˜v in M from its ι(˜p) to τ(˜p).
The 1-path q = φ(˜q) has the form urv, where r = φ(˜r) = ⌈f⌉. So we have an atomic 2-path
δ = (u, f, v) in K with ⌈δ⌉= q. Since M′ satisﬁes U2, the local map of M′ at ˜q is surjective and
so δ has a preimage ˜δ with top ˜q. The 2-cell of ˜δ is labelled by f and its top is ˜r. If there were
two 2-cells in M′ with the same top ˜r and the same label f, then we would have a contradiction
with the injectivity of that local map.
Let us take the natural ﬁltration of M′, that is, the ascending union M′
0 ⊆M′
1 ⊆· · · deﬁned
in Section 7. Recall that M′
0 is the root arc of M′ and for any n ≥0, M′
n+1 is the subcomplex
in M′ formed by M′
n and all the 2-cells f /∈M′
n such that ⌈f⌉is contained in M′
n. All the
subcomplexes M′
n are rooted 2-trees with the same root. It suﬃces to show that Mn and M′
n
are isomorphic as directed 2-complexes over K for any n ≥0. We prove this fact by induction.
If n = 0, then both M0 and M′
0 are simple arcs labelled by p. Assume that Mn and M′
n
are isomorphic for some n ≥0 (as complexes over K). For simplicity, we can identify Mn and
M′
n. We are going to establish a natural bijection between the 2-cells of Mn+1 \ Mn and the
2-cells of M′
n+1 \M′
n. Each pair of the 2-cells in the bijection, will have the same label and the
same top contained in Mn = M′
n. This will clearly induce the desired isomorphism between
Mn+1 and M′
n+1.
Let ˜f be a 2-cell of Mn+1 \ Mn, where ˜r =
l
˜f
m
is contained in Mn and φ( ˜f) = f. By U2′,
there is a 2-cell ˜f ′ in M′ labelled by f with the top ˜r. This cell cannot belong to M′
n since
otherwise it also belongs to Mn and so M will have two diﬀerent 2-cells with the same label
and the same top. Thus it belongs to Mn+1 by deﬁnition of the natural ﬁltration. In fact the
map ˜f 7→˜f ′ is the desired bijection. Indeed if ˜f ′ is a 2-cell of M′
n+1 \M′
n, then M must contain
a 2-cell ˜f labelled by f with top ˜r. By the same arguments, ˜f does not belong to Mn = M′
n.
So it belongs to Mn+1 by deﬁnition.
Remark 8.2. The proof of Theorem 8.1 also shows that a directed 2-complex M over K with
a labelling map φ is a universal 2-cover of K if and only if it satisﬁes U1 and U2′ (thus U2 can
be replaced by U2′). The condition U2′ is sometimes easier to verify than U2.
The universal 2-cover of K with base p will be denoted by eKp. There are two useful orienta-
tions on eKp. First, we have the natural orientation on eKp because it is a rooted 2-tree. The set
of its positive 2-cells will be denoted by eF+. Second, given an orientation on the set of 2-cells of
K, we have an induced orientation on the set of 2-cells of eKp. Namely, a 2-cell of eKp is positive
in that orientation whenever its image under φ is a positive 2-cell of K.
In order to illustrate the process of constructing eKp, let us take K to be the Dunce hat
H0 = ⟨x | x2 = x ⟩and let p = x.
Then the natural ﬁltration K0 ⊆K1 ⊆· · · of eKp is
constructed as follows.
The complex K0 is just an edge e labelled by x.
The complex K1
consists of three vertices, three edges, and one positive 2-cell (in the natural orientation) of the
form e = e1e2 labelled by the cell x = x2 (all edges of eKp are labelled by x). Now we get a
new path ˜q = e1e2 connecting ι(e) and τ(e). Its image q in H0 is the 1-path x2. There are
three atomic 2-paths in H0 with top 1-path q: (1, x2 = x, 1), (1, x = x2, x) and (x, x = x2, 1).
The ﬁrst of them has a preimage in K1, the other two do not have preimages. Thus we need
27


to add two new positive 2-cells to K1: a cell of the form e1 = e11e12 and a cell of the form
e2 = e21e22. The resulting complex is K2, it has ﬁve vertices, seven edges, and three positive
2-cells. The complex K3 has seven new positive 2-cells: four cells of the form eij = eij1eij2,
where i, j ∈{1, 2}, and three cells e1e21 = f1, e12e2 = f2, e12e21 = f, where f1, f2, f are new
edges. Altogether the directed 2-complex K3 has 9 vertices, 18 edges, and 10 positive 2-cells,
etc.
In the remaining part of this section, we ﬁx a directed 2-complex K, a 1-path p in K, the
root ˜p of the universal 2-cover eKp of K, the natural ﬁltration K0 ⊆K1 ⊆· · · of eKp, and the
labelling map φ from eKp to K.
The following lemma is the analog of the lifting lemma in the theory of “ordinary” covering
spaces.
Lemma 8.3. For every 2-path δ in K with ⌈δ⌉= p, there exists a unique 2-path ˜δ in the
universal 2-cover eKp such that
l
˜δ
m
= ˜p and φ(˜δ) = δ.
For any (p, q)-diagram ∆over K, where q is a 1-path in K, there exists a unique 1-path ˜q
in eKp and a unique (˜p, ˜q)-diagram e∆over eKp such that the morphism φ maps e∆onto ∆.
Proof. The ﬁrst part of the lemma immediately follows from condition U2.
Let us consider any (p, q)-diagram ∆over K. It corresponds to some 2-path δ in K with the
top 1-path p. We can lift δ to a 2-path ˜δ in eKp. The diagram e∆of this 2-path is a preimage of
∆under φ. Clearly, any (˜p, ˜q)-diagram e∆′ over eKp such that φ(e∆′) = ∆corresponds to a lift ˜δ′
of δ.
All 2-paths assigned to the same diagram ∆are isotopic (see Section 3). Notice that the
local maps preserve the property of a pair of atomic 2-paths to be independent. Therefore, by
Lemma 2.2 isotopic 2-paths in K lift to isotopic 2-paths of eKp. Hence the diagram e∆with the
desired properties is unique.
We shall say that the diagram e∆from the statement of Lemma 8.3 is a lift of ∆.
The following theorem shows a connection between the universal cover of the Squier complex
Sq(K) and the universal 2-cover of K.
We are going to use Farley’s [14] description of the universal cover f
Sq(K) of Sq(K). Farley
proved, in the case of semigroup presentations, that f
Sq(K) can be described in just the same
way as Sq(K): the vertices of f
Sq(K) are arbitrary diagrams over K, and for arbitrary n ≥1 the
n-cubes are pairs where the ﬁrst component is an arbitrary diagram ∆over K, and the second
component is an arbitrary thin diagram Θ over K with n cells such that ∆◦Θ exists and has
no dipoles. The face maps are deﬁned in the natural way. The restriction of the covering map
f
Sq(K) →Sq(K) to the vertices is ⌊·⌋. Any realization of the cubical complex f
Sq(K) will be also
denoted by f
Sq(K). Farley’s proof carries without any change to the case of arbitrary directed
2-complexes.
Theorem 8.4. The connected component Sq( eKp, ˜p) of the Squier complex of the universal 2-
cover eKp is homeomorphic to the universal cover of the connected component Sq(K, p) of the
Squier complex of K.
Proof. We are using the fact that the space of positive paths in eKp is a realization of the Squier
complex Sq( eKp) (Lemma 3.7).
Consider the connected component of Ω+( eKp) that contains
28


˜p. By deﬁnition, any positive path ˜q in eKp from ι to τ can be uniquely decomposed into the
product
˜q = u0f (1)
t1 u1 · · · f (m)
tm um,
(16)
where m ≥0, u0, . . . , um are 1-paths, f (1), . . . , f (m) are 2-cells in eF+ and the parameters
t1, . . . , tm belong to the open interval (0, 1). It is clear that these and only these paths form
the connected component of ˜p in Ω+( eKp). Let ˜r = u0

f (1)
u1 · · ·

f (m)
um. We assign to ˜q an
ordered pair (e∆, eΨ), where e∆is the reduced (˜p, ˜r)-diagram over eKp (this diagram exists by the
property T2 of the rooted 2-tree eKp and is unique by property T3). By eΨ we denote the thin
diagram ε(u0) + f (1) + ε(u1) + · · · + f (m) + ε(um). If we apply the morphism φ to e∆and eΨ,
we get a pair (∆, Ψ), where ∆is a (p, r)-diagram over K and Ψ is a thin diagram over K. It is
obvious that the concatenation ∆◦Ψ exists, moreover, it follows from the construction of eKp
that it has no dipoles. So the pair (∆, Ψ) deﬁnes an m-dimensional cube in f
Sq(K, p) according
to [14]. Take the point with coordinates (t1, . . . , tm) in this m-cube and assign it to the element
˜q. It is not hard to show that this deﬁnes a homeomorphism between the connected component
of the path ˜p in Ω+( eKp) and the space f
Sq(K, p) from Farley [14].
The following important theorem by Farley [14] also can be translated into the language of
directed 2-complexes without diﬃculty.
Theorem 8.5. ([14]) The universal cover f
Sq(K, p) of Sq(K, p) is contractible. Hence Sq(K, p)
is a K(G, 1) CW complex for the diagram group G = D(K, p), for every directed 2-complex K
and every 1-path p in K.
Remark 8.6. The proof of contractibility of f
Sq(K, p) given in [14] is based on some classical
topological facts such as Whitehead’s theorem. We give a direct geometric proof using Theorem
8.4 here.
We can represent the space Ω+( eKp) as the ascending union Ω0 ⊆Ω1 ⊆· · · , where Ωn (n ≥0)
is formed by those positive paths from the connected component of ˜p which belong to Kn. Since
Ω0 consists of the single point ˜p, it suﬃces to show that Ωn is a deformation retract of Ωn+1 for
all n ≥0. To show this, we take any element in Ωn+1. This is a positive path in eKp from ι to
τ. It can be uniquely represented in the form h = v0g(1)
s1 v1 · · · g(k)
sk vk, where k ≥0, v0, . . . , vk are
positive paths in Kn, the 2-cells g(1), . . . , g(k) belong to Kn+1 \ Kn and s1, . . . , sk ∈(0, 1]. Here
we also assume that all the 2-cells g(i) (1 ≤i ≤k) are in eF+, that is, they have their top paths
in Kn and the bottom paths in Kn+1 \ Kn. For any s ∈[0, 1], we deﬁne the positive path
hs = v0g(1)
ss1v1 · · · g(k)
sskvk.
(17)
It is obvious that h0 belongs to Kn and h1 = h. It is also clear that hs = h for all s ∈[0, 1]
provided h belongs to Kn. The map (h, s) 7→hs from Ωn+1 ×[0, 1] to Ωn+1 is clearly continuous.
Thus Ωn is a deformation retract of Ωn+1.
The fact that eKp is a covering space for Sq(K, p) can be proved easily as well. The covering
map can be constructed as follows.
We extend φ to the set of all positive paths in eKp by
sending the paths of the form ˜ft, where ˜f is a 2-cell of eKp and t ∈[0, 1], to the positive path ft
in K (f = φ( ˜f) is the label of ˜f). Now φ maps the connected component of ˜p in Ω+( eKp) onto
Sq(K, p). We leave it to the reader as an exercise to check that φ deﬁnes the desired covering
map. (In fact, this is essentially contained in Lemma 8.3 and its proof.)
29


Remark 8.7. Recall that Farley proved that every connected component f
Sq(K) is a CAT(0)
cubical complex provided, for example, K is ﬁnite. Thus is this case the diagram groups of K
act discretely, cellularly, by isometries on CAT(0) cubical complexes.
Remark 8.8. There exists an alternative method of constructing the universal 2-cover eKp.
Similarly to the Stallings foldings in graphs [32], let us deﬁne an elementary 2-folding in a
complex M over K as follows. If two 2-cells π1 and π2 in M have a common top path and the
same label, then we identify their bottom paths and remove one of the cells. The result of this
operation is again a directed 2-complex over K.
Consider all possible diagrams over K with top 1-path labelled by p. Identify the top paths
of all these diagrams. Clearly, we get a directed 2-complex N over K. Now do all (possibly
inﬁnitely many) elementary 2-foldings in N. It can be shown that the resulting directed 2-
complex over K is eKp. We shall prove this in our next paper where foldings are used in a more
general situation.
9
Homology
Theorem 8.5 shows that the components Sq(K, w) are K(G, 1) spaces for diagram groups G =
D(K, w). In fact in most cases Sq(K) is too large. Here we will use the technique of collapsing
schemes [9, 8, 12] to ﬁnd a “smaller” CW complex, which is homotopy equivalent to Sq(K) (at
least in the case when K is complete).
We recall the concept of collapsing scheme from [8, 12, 9]. Let X be a semi-cubical complex.
We say that we have a collapsing scheme for X if the following is true:
• there exists a subdivision of the set of all cubes of X into three disjoint subsets: essential,
collapsible, and redundant cubes;
• there exists a strict partial order ≻on the set of all redundant n-cubes (n ≥0) that
satisﬁes the descending chain condition (that is, any sequence c1 ≻c2 ≻· · · terminates).
• there exists a bijection c 7→ˆc between the set of all redundant n-cubes and the set of all
collapsible (n + 1)-cubes (for every n ≥0);
• any redundant n-cube c occurs exactly once among the n-faces of ˆc and all the other
redundant n-faces c′ of ˆc precede c in the order ≻(that is, c ≻c′); the redundant n-cube
c is called the free face of the collapsible (n + 1)-cube ˆc.
The next lemma is proved in almost the same way as [8, Proposition 1].
Lemma 9.1. Given a collapsible scheme for a semi-cubical complex X, one can construct a
CW complex Y which is homotopy equivalent to X in such a way that the n-cells of Y are in
one-to-one correspondence with the essential n-cubes of X.
As in [8], for each n ≥0 one has to do an inﬁnite number of elementary steps, one for each
collapsible n-cube. The free face of a collapsible cube is identiﬁed (homeomorphically) with the
union of the other faces and the collapsible cube disappears. The space Y is a end result of the
process.
Now let K be a complete directed 2-complex. Let Tl be a left forest in K. Recall that for
any 1-path p, the irreducible form of p is denoted by ¯p.
30


Let c = ε(u0) + f1 + · · · + fn + ε(un) be an n-cube of X (a thin diagram with n cells). For
any 0 ≤i ≤n, we say that the term ui in c is special provided it is not an irreducible 1-path,
that is, ¯ui ̸= ui. For 1 ≤i ≤n, we say that the term fi in c is special provided (ui−1, fi, ∗) is
in Tl.
The n-cube c is called essential if it has no special terms. If c is not essential, then we ﬁnd
its leftmost special term. If this is one of the ui’s, then we call c redundant. Otherwise we call
c collapsible (in this case the special term is one of the fi’s).
To describe the strict partial order ≻, we need to introduce one technical concept.
Let
Ψ = ε(u0) + g1 + · · · + gk + ε(uk) (k ≥0) be a thin diagram over K. Suppose that for some
i, j, where 0 ≤i ≤j ≤k, we have uj = u′ ⌊g⌋u′′, for some 1-paths u′, u′′ and g ∈F−.
Then it is possible to move the cell gi to the right replacing Ψ by a new thin diagram Ψ′ =
ε(u0) + · · · + ε(ui−1) + ε(⌊gi⌋) + · · · + ε(u′) + g + ε(u′′) + · · · (we replace the term gi by ε(⌊gi⌋)
and the term ε(uj) by ε(u′)+g +ε(u′′), thus we remove the cell gi and insert a cell g). It is easy
to see that this process of moving cells to the right always terminates. Indeed, Ψ′ has also k
cells and it can be represented in the form Ψ′ = ε(u′
0) + g′
1 + · · · + g′
k + ε(u′
k). If we compare the
(k + 1)-vectors b = (|uk|, . . . , |u0|) and b′ = (|u′
k|, . . . , |u′
0|), then it follows from our description
that b′ strictly precedes b in the lexicographical order. Since these vectors have non-negative
coordinates, the process of moving cells to the right must terminate.
Now we can deﬁne ≻. Let c, c′ be redundant n-cubes of X. If ⌊c⌋
+
→⌊c′⌋then we set
c ≻c′. Otherwise, if ⌊c⌋= ⌊c′⌋, then we set c ≻c′ whenever c′ can be obtained from c by a
(non-zero) number of moving cells to the right. The fact that K is Noetherian and the remark
from the previous paragraph imply that ≻is a strict partial order satisfying the descending
chain condition.
Let c = ε(u0) + f1 + · · · + fn + ε(un) be a redundant n-cube. This means that ui is not
irreducible for some 0 ≤i ≤n whereas all the terms to the left of ui are not special. Let us ﬁnd
the edge (p, f, q) in Tl assigned to ui. Thus ui = p ⌊f⌋q. Note that p is irreducible by deﬁnition.
Thus the (n + 1)-cube ε(u0) + f1 + · · · + fi + ε(p) + f + ε(q) + · · · is collapsible. We denote it by
ˆc and check that c is the free face of ˆc. We consider all n-faces ⌈ˆc⌉j and ⌊ˆc⌋j of ˆc, 1 ≤j ≤n + 1.
Let j = i + 1. Then ⌊ˆc⌋j = c and c′ = ⌈ˆc⌉j is obtained from c by replacing ⌊f⌋by ⌈f⌉. Since f
participates in an edge from Tl, one has ⌊f⌋+
→⌈f⌉. Hence c ≻c′ whenever c′ is redundant.
Now suppose that j > i + 1. Then ⌊ˆc⌋j and ⌈ˆc⌉j are collapsible n-cubes. Thus we may skip
this case because we compare c with redundant cubes only.
Finally, take j ≤i. We can only consider the case when c′ = ⌊ˆc⌋j since ⌊fj⌋
+
→⌈fj⌉or
⌊fj⌋= ⌈fj⌉. Suppose that c′ is a redundant n-cube. To compare c and c′, notice that their
bottom paths are the same. The diagram c′ is obtained by moving one cell of c to the right (the
cell fj has been deleted and the cell f has been added). Thus c ≻c′.
It remains to check that we have a bijection between redundant n-cubes and collapsible
(n + 1)-cubes. We already assigned a collapsible (n + 1)-cube ˆc to each redundant n-cube c.
If we start with a collapsible (n + 1)-cube, then we can ﬁnd its leftmost special term. This is
some f ∈F−. The cube then has the form · · · + ε(p) + f + ε(q) + · · ·, where (p, f, q) is in Tl.
Replacing f by ⌊f⌋gives us a redundant cube c. It follows directly from deﬁnitions that the
cube ˆc assigned to c is exactly the collapsible (n + 1)-cube we started with. This completes our
proof that we have deﬁned a collapsible scheme for X.
Summarizing and taking into account Lemma 9.1, we get the following.
Theorem 9.2. Suppose that K is a complete directed 2-complex and let G = D(K, w), where w is
a non-empty 1-path in K. Then there exists a K(G, 1) CW complex Yw whose n-dimensional cells
31


are in one-to-one correspondence with thin diagrams of the form c = ε(u0)+f1+· · ·+fn+ε(un),
where n ≥0, the 1-paths ui are irreducible for all 0 ≤i ≤n, the edges (ui−1, fi, ∗) are not in Tl
for all 1 ≤i ≤n, and ⌈c⌉is homotopic to w in K.
Note that each thin diagram c described in the statement of Theorem 9.2 is an essential
cube in the Squier complex Sq(K).
Recall that a directed 2-complex is called 2-path connected if all non-empty 1-paths in it are
homotopic. Let us call a directed 2-complex almost 2-path connected if the number of classes of
homotopic 1-paths is ﬁnite (that is, Sq(K) has ﬁnitely many connected components). A complex
of the form KP, where P is a semigroup presentation, is almost 2-path connected if and only if
the semigroup given by P is ﬁnite. Thus the following statement generalizes a result from [14]
and strengthens [16, Theorem 10.7].
Theorem 9.3. Let K be a ﬁnite almost 2-path connected 2-complex. Then all diagram groups
of K are of type F∞.
Proof. First suppose that K is complete.
Let C denote the number of homotopy classes of
1-paths in K (the empty 1-paths are included) and let N be the number of positive 2-cells of
K. It is clear that the number of n-cells in the K(G, 1) space Yw does not exceed C(CN)n. In
particular, it is ﬁnite so G has type F∞.
Now suppose that K is not necessarily complete. By Lemma 6.1, K is contained in a ﬁnite
complete almost 2-path connected directed 2-complex K′, and the diagram groups of K are
retracts of the diagram groups of K′. It remains to recall that a retract of an F∞group is of
type F∞.
By [16, Theorem 10.3], if P is a ﬁnite complete rewrite system such that all diagram groups
over it are ﬁnitely generated, then all of them are ﬁnitely presented. Now we can deduce a much
stronger result. In fact we can even eliminate the assumption that the presentation is ﬁnite.
Theorem 9.4. Let K be a complete directed 2-complex. Suppose that all diagram groups of K
are ﬁnitely generated. Then all of them are of type F∞.
Proof. By Theorem 9.2 it is enough to prove that for any n ≥1, each connected component
of Sq(K) has only ﬁnitely many essential n-cubes. We proceed by induction on n. Let n = 1.
By deﬁnition, the set of essential cubes of dimension 1 is in one-to-one correspondence with the
generating set of the corresponding diagram group described in Theorem 6.6. Since this set is
minimal by Remark 6.7, it is ﬁnite.
Now let n > 1. For any essential 1-cube ε(p) + f + ε(q) of a connected component Sq(K, w)
of Sq(K), let us consider the set of all essential (n −1)-cubes in Sq(K, q). By the inductive
assumption, it is ﬁnite. It remains to note that any essential n-cube c = ε(u0) + f1 + · · · + fn +
ε(un) of Sq(K, w) is determined uniquely by an essential 1-cube ε(u0) + f1 + ε(q) of Sq(K, w)
and an essential (n −1)-cube ε(u1) + f2 + · · · + fn + ε(un) from Sq(K, q).
Remark 9.5. Note that one can extract a stronger fact from the proof of Theorem 9.4. Suppose
that K is a complete directed 2-complex. If some diagram group D(K, w) is not of type F∞, then
there are two 1-paths w′w1 and w2w′′ homotopic to w such that the diagram groups D(K, w′)
and D(K, w′′) are not ﬁnitely generated.
Now we are going to prove that for any complete directed 2-complex K, the complex Yw
described in the statement of Theorem 9.2 is in fact “minimal”. Namely, for every n ≥0, we
shall compute the integer nth homology group of every diagram group D(K, w) of K and show
32


that it is a free Abelian group whose rank coincides with the number of n-cells in Yw (that is,
the number of essential n-cubes in Sq(K, w).
Let G = D(K, w). Since the homology groups of a group G coincide with the homology
groups of any K(G, 1) CW complex, let us consider the complex X = Sq(K, w) (it is a K(G, 1)
by Theorem 8.5). As usual, let Tl be a left forest in X.
Denote by Pn the free Abelian group with the set of n-cubes of X as a free basis. The
boundary maps ∂n: Pn →Pn−1 (n ≥1) are given by the formulas of Serre [30, p. 440] (see also
[9]):
∂n(c) =
n
X
i=1
(−1)i(⌈c⌉i −⌊c⌋i),
(18)
where c is an n-cube. Since the maps (18) form a chain complex [30], the nth integer homol-
ogy group Hn(G; Z) coincides with the nth homology group of that chain complex (that is,
Ker ∂n/ Im ∂n+1).
As in [8, 12], we deﬁne an endomorphism φ of the chain complex P = (Pn, ∂n).
This
endomorphism maps every Pn into the subgroup Qn of Pn freely generated by the essential
n-cubes. Let c be an n-cube (a generator of Pn). If c is collapsible then we set φ(c) = 0. If c is
essential then we set φ(c) = c. Finally suppose that c is redundant. In that case we proceed by
the Noetherian induction on ≻.
Since c is redundant, there exists a collapsible (n + 1)-cube ˆc such that c is the free face of
ˆc. Then ∂n+1(ˆc) = ±c + Σ for some linear combination Σ of cubes that are either essential or
collapsible or redundant but smaller than c with respect to ≻. Thus we can assume that φ(c′)
has been deﬁned already for all c′ occurring in Σ. So we can set φ(c) = ∓φ(Σ).
It is shown in [12] (see also [8, p. 150]), that φ indeed is an endomorphism of the chain
complex (that is, it commutes with the boundary maps), and that the chain complex Q formed
by the groups Qn and boundary maps δn = φ∂n is chain-equivalent to the initial chain complex.
Thus the homology groups of Q coincide with the homology groups of P.
We are going to prove that δn is a zero map. For that we need the following statement.
Lemma 9.6. For any n-cube c = ε(u0) + f1 + · · · + fn + ε(un) of Sq(K, w), we let ¯c = ε(¯u0) +
f1 + · · · + fn + ε(¯un). Then φ(c) = ¯c if ¯c is essential and φ(c) = 0 if ¯c is collapsible (note that
¯c cannot be redundant by deﬁnition).
Proof. Note that if c is essential then c = ¯c and φ(c) = c as required.
Suppose that c is collapsible. Then φ(c) = 0 by deﬁnition. Thus we only need to check that
¯c is also collapsible. Since c is collapsible, the edge (ui−1, fi, ∗) is in the left forest Tl for some
i ≤n and all the uj’s are irreducible for 0 ≤j < i. Then ¯c possesses similar properties whence
¯c is collapsible.
Now suppose that c is redundant. Take the smallest number i ≤n such that ui is not
irreducible, and consider the edge (p, f, q) from Tl assigned to ui. This i will be called the index
of c. Consider also the collapsible (n + 1)-cube ˆc = ε(u0) + · · · + fi + ε(p) + f + ε(q) + · · · whose
free cell is c. Since K is Noetherian, we can assume without loss of generality that the statement
of the lemma does not hold for c but holds for all n-cubes c′ such that ⌊c⌋+
→⌊c′⌋. We can also
assume that among all such counterexamples, c has the smallest index i.
Notice that for every j, 1 ≤j ≤n + 1,
⌈ˆc⌉j = ⌊ˆc⌋j.
(19)
33


Also notice that c = ⌊ˆc⌋i+1 and ⌊c⌋
+
→⌊c′⌋, where c′ = ⌈ˆc⌉i+1. By (19), ¯c = c′. By the
deﬁnition of φ, we have φ(c) = φ(c′) + φ(Σ), where Σ is the sum of ⌈ˆc⌉j −⌊ˆc⌋j, j ̸= i + 1 by
(18).
It remains to check that
φ(⌈ˆc⌉j −⌊ˆc⌋j) = 0
(20)
for every j ̸= i + 1. If j > i + 1, then both cells ⌈ˆc⌉j and ⌊ˆc⌋j are collapsible, so φ(⌈ˆc⌉j) =
φ(⌊ˆc⌋j) = 0 and (20) holds.
Let 1 ≤j ≤i. The thin diagrams e′ = ⌈ˆc⌉j and e = ⌊ˆc⌋j are obtained from ˆc by replacing
fj by its top and bottom path, respectively. Suppose that e′ ̸= e (otherwise there is nothing to
prove). Thus ⌊fj⌋+
→⌈fj⌉and the statement of the lemma holds for e′ because ⌊c⌋= ⌊e⌋+
→⌊e′⌋.
It is easy to see from deﬁnition that the cube e is redundant. The index of e is j −1 < i. Hence
the statement of the lemma holds for e as well. By (19), e′ = ¯e. Therefore, φ(e′ −e) = 0 and
(20) holds.
Now it is easy to show that all boundary maps δn, n ≥1, in the chain complex Q are zero.
Indeed, by Lemma 9.6, the value φ(c) depends only on ¯c. By (19) and (18), for every n-cube c,
δn(c) = φ∂n(c) = φ
 n
X
i=1
(−1)i(⌈c⌉i −⌊c⌋i)
!
=
n
X
i=1
(−1)i(φ(⌈c⌉i) −φ(⌊c⌋i)) = 0.
Thus Ker ∂n = Qn and Im ∂n+1 = 0. Hence for Hn(G; Z) ∼= Qn is free Abelian, n ≥1.
If n = 0, then H0(G; Z) ∼= Z and we have only one essential cell of dimension 0 — this is
the vertex corresponding to the irreducible 1-path of Sq(K, w). Thus we proved
Theorem 9.7. Let K be a complete directed 2-complex and let w be a non-empty 1-path in K.
The nth integer homology Hn(G; Z) (n ≥0) of the diagram group G = D(K, w) is free Abelian.
Its free basis consists of all essential n-cubes from Sq(K, w).
Theorem 9.7 implies that the CW complex Yw from Theorem 9.2 gives a minimal presenta-
tion of G = D(K, w) in terms both the number of generators and the number of relations. In
fact, it gives a minimal set of generators of homology groups in all dimensions.
Remark 9.8. It is not diﬃcult to prove that the presentation given by Yw is precisely the
presentation from Theorem 6.6, where Tr is replaced by Tl (see Remark 6.7, part b). We already
know (Remark 6.7, part a) that the presentation from Theorem 6.6 involves the minimal possible
number of generators. Let us show that it contains the minimal number of relations as well.
For any 1-path p, let us denote by µ(p) the minimal number of generators for the diagram
group G = D(K, w). This is exactly the number of edges of the form (u, f, v) /∈Tl that belong
to Sq(K, w), where u, v are irreducible, f ∈F −(these are the essential 1-cubes of Sq(K, w)).
If we replace here Tl by Tr, then we again have a minimal generating set of G because of a
symmetry. It is easy to give a formula to compute the number of the deﬁning relations of G
given by Theorem 9.2. Let s1, . . . , sm be the third components of the essential 1-cubes of G
(m = µ(w)). Each of the deﬁning relations corresponds to an essential 1-cube in Sq(K, si) for
some i. Thus the sum µ(s1) + · · · + µ(sm) is exactly the number of the deﬁning relations of G
given by Theorem 9.2. Clearly, it will be the same if we use Tr instead of Tl in the deﬁnition of
essential cubes. Thus the number of deﬁning relations given by Theorem 6.6 and Theorem 9.2
are the same.
34


Now consider the homology groups of arbitrary diagram groups. Let H be a diagram group
of an arbitrary directed 2-complex. We know from Lemma 5.1, part 4 that H is a retract of a
diagram group G of a complete directed 2-complex. Notice that the retraction can be described
in the language of group homomorphisms: H is a retract of G if and only if there are two
homomorphisms φ: G →H and ψ: H →G such that φψ = idH (ψ acts ﬁrst). Since Hn(−, Z)
is a covariant functor [7], this implies that Hn(H; Z) is a retract of Hn(G; Z). In particular,
Hn(H; Z) is also free Abelian and its rank does not exceed the rank of Hn(G; Z). So we proved
Theorem 9.9. For any n ≥0 and for any diagram group G, the nth integer homology group
Hn(G; Z) is free Abelian.
This theorem answers a question by S. Pride.
If G is a group of type F∞, then one can consider its Poincar´e series
PG(t) =
∞
X
n=0
rntn,
where rn denotes the rank of the nth integer homology group of G. Note that r0 = 1.
Example 9.10. a) Let K = ⟨x | xr = x ⟩(r ≥2). It is proved in [16] that D(K, x) ∼= Fr,
where Fr is a generalization of the R. Thompson group F = F2 deﬁned in [8]. That complex
is complete so we can use Theorems 9.2 and 9.7. The essential n-cells of this complex (n ≥1)
have the form c = ε(xk0) + (x = xr) + ε(xk1) + · · · + (x = xr) + ε(xkn), where 1 ≤ki < r for
0 ≤i < n, 0 ≤kn < r. These cells may belong to diﬀerent components of Sq(K). Clearly, c
belongs to the component of x if and only if the sum n + k0 + k1 + · · · + kn equals 1 modulo
r −1. This condition determines uniquely the number k0 by the other numbers. So there are
exactly r · (r −1)n−1 ways to choose c in Sq(K, x). (For instance, in the case r = 2 we have the
R. Thompson’s group F, which has Z2 as its nth integer homology group for n ≥1, which was
proved in [9].)
The Poincar´e series for Fr has the form
P(t) = 1 + rt + r(r −1)t2 + · · · + r(r −1)n−1tn + · · · =
1 + t
1 −(r −1)t.
b) Now let V = ⟨y | y3 = y2 ⟩be the complex on Figure 9 (by Theorem 5.7, the diagram
group D(V, y2) is universal).
The complex V is complete as well.
The essential n-cubes in
Sq(V, x2) have the form c = ε(yk0) + (y2 = y3) + yk1 + · · · + (y2 = y3) + ε(ykn), where ki = 1, 2
for 0 ≤i < n, kn = 1, 2, 3. All of them for n ≥1 belong to Sq(K, y2). Hence the rank of the
nth homology group of D(V, x2) is 3 · 2n (n ≥1) and so the Poincar´e series is
P(t) = 1 + 6t + 12t2 + · · · + 3 · 2ntn + · · · = 1 + 4t
1 −2t.
Notice that the Poincar´e series of D(V, x2) coincides with the Poincar´e series of the free product
F3 ∗F3 but these diagram groups are not isomorphic (which can be proved by using Kurosh’s
theorem).
c) One more universal diagram group is given by the complete directed 2-complex H1 = ⟨x |
x2 = x, x = x ⟩(Theorem 5.6). Let us ﬁnd the number of the essential n-cubes in Sq(H1, x).
Let c = ε(u0) + f1 + · · · + fn + ε(un) be one of these cubes. Then there are three possibilities
for each of the pairs (ui−1, fi), namely, (x, x = x2), (1, x = x), or (x, x = x) (1 ≤i ≤n). There
35


are two possibilities for the 1-path un, namely, 1 and x. So the rank of the nth homology group
of G1 = D(H1, x) equals 2 · 3n for n ≥1. It is interesting to mention that both universal groups
considered in b), c) have the same minimal number of generators (equal to 6) and we know that
they are embeddable into each other because of their universal property. However, they are not
isomorphic because their second homology groups have ranks 12 and 18, respectively. Thus the
Poincar´e series of G1 is
P(t) = 1 + 6t + 18t2 + · · · + 2 · 3ntn + · · · = 1 + 3t
1 −3t.
We see that all these Poincar´e series are rational. This can be explained by the following
Theorem 9.11. Let K be a complete ﬁnite almost 2-path connected directed 2-complex. Then
the Poincar´e series of any of its diagram groups is rational.
Proof. We refer to [25] for the well-known properties of rational languages. Let A = P∪(P×F−),
where P consists of all irreducible 1-paths in K, including the empty 1-paths, F−consists of all
negative 2-cells of K.
Let 0 be a symbol not in P, and let us deﬁne a binary operation · on S = P∪{0}: p · q = pq
if τ(p) = ι(q), p, q ∈P; all other products are equal to 0. It is easy to see that S is a semigroup.
Let φ be a homomorphism from the free semigroup A+ to S induced by the map that takes
each p ∈P to itself and each pair (p, f) ∈P×F−to p ⌈f⌉= p ⌊f⌋. Notice that for every s ∈P,
every word w of the form (u0, f1) · · · (un−1, fn)un from the rational language φ−1(s) ⊆A+
corresponds to an n-cube in Sq(K, s). This cube is essential if and only if w does not contain
letters of the form (p, f), where p ∈P, f ∈F−, and (p, f, ∗) belongs to the ﬁxed left forest Tl
of Sq(K).
Thus let L be the sublanguage of φ−1(s) consisting of all words from φ−1(s)∩A+P which do
not contain the letters described in the previous paragraph. Clearly, L is a rational language.
There exists a one-to-one correspondence between words of length n + 1 in L and essential
n-cubes in Sq(K, s). Since the generating function of a rational language L is rational (see for
example [11]), the Poincar´e series of Sq(K, s) is a rational function as well.
Recall [7] that for any group G, its geometric dimension, gd(G), is the smallest dimension of
a K(G, 1). Its cohomological dimension, cd(G), is the length of the shortest projective resolution
of the trivial ZG-module Z. It is easy to see [7] that
cd(G) ≤gd(G).
(21)
By the Eilenberg – Ganea theorem [24], cd(G) = gd(G) provided cd(G) ̸= 2 or gd(G) ̸= 3.
Theorems 9.2 and 9.7 immediately imply that for diagram groups over complete directed
2-complexes these two dimensions coincide.
Theorem 9.12. For every diagram group G over a complete directed 2-complex,
cd(G) = gd(G).
Proof. Let G = D(K, w). By Theorem 9.7 the length of any projective resolution of the trivial
ZG-module Z cannot be smaller than the highest dimension n of an essential cube of Sq(K, w).
By Theorem 9.2, n ≥gd(G).
Therefore, cd(G) ≥n ≥gd(G).
Hence by (21), gd(G) =
cd(G).
36


The following result gives an algebraic characterization of groups of ﬁnite cohomological
dimension among diagram group of complete directed 2-complexes.
Theorem 9.13. Let G be a diagram group over a complete directed 2-complex K, and n be a
natural number. Then cd(G) ≥n if and only if G contains a copy of Zn.
Proof. Let G = D(K, w). Let Tl be a left forest in Sq(K). The “if” statement is well known
[7]. So suppose that cd(G) ≥n. Then by Theorem 9.7, Sq(K, w) contains an essential cube
c = ε(u0) + f1 + · · · + fn + ε(un).
By deﬁnition, for every 1 ≤i ≤n, the edge (ui−1, fi, ∗) does not belong to Tl. Hence the
connected component Sq(K, ui−1 ⌊fi⌋) contains edges not in Tl.
Therefore, by Theorem 6.6
(or Theorem 9.7), the group Gi = D(K, ui−1 ⌊fi⌋) is non-trivial. Since all diagram groups are
torsion-free [16], Gi contains a copy of Z.
By Corollary 3.6, the diagram group G1 × · · · × Gn embeds into H = D(K, p), where
p = u0 ⌊f1⌋· · · ⌊fn⌋un. Therefore, a copy of Zn is contained in H. But by the choice of c, the
1-paths p and w are in the same connected component of Sq(K). Hence by Corollary 3.5, H is
isomorphic to G, so G contains a copy of Zn, as required.
Notice that Theorem 10.4 below gives a characterization of directed 2-complexes K such
that D(K, w) contains a copy of Zn.
Theorem 9.13 immediately implies the following result.
Theorem 9.14. A diagram group G over a complete directed 2-complex is free if and only if
G does not contain a copy of Z2. In particular, a hyperbolic group can be a diagram group of a
complete directed 2-complex if and only if it is free.
Proof. Indeed, by Theorem 9.12, if G does not contain Z2 then cd(G) ≤1, and one can use the
well known result of Stallings and Swan [24] (or, easier, one can use Remark 9.8, and conclude
that G has a presentation with no relations).
Problem 9.15. Is it possible to drop the completeness restriction from the formulations of
Theorems 9.11, 9.12, 9.13, 9.14?
Remark 9.16. Recall that by Lemma 3.7 the space of positive paths Ω+(K) is a realization
of Sq(K). By Theorem 8.5, the homology of a connected component of that space coincides
with the homology of the corresponding diagram group. Hence by Theorem 9.11, the Poincar´e
series of the space of positive paths of a complete almost 2-path connected directed 2-complex is
rational. This resembles the well known result of Serre (see, for example, [1]) that the Poincar´e
series of the loop space of a simply connected CW 2-complex is always rational.
Remark 9.17. Notice that the completeness restriction in the statements of this paper can be
replaced by the condition “there exists a left forest”. Say, let K = ⟨a, b | ab = a, ba = b ⟩. It is not
hard to check that K is not complete. However, one can construct a spanning forest satisfying
conditions F1 and F2 of the left forest (it is formed by all edges of the form (1, a = ab, ∗),
(a, b = ba, ∗), (1, b = ba, ∗), (b, a = ab, ∗) and the inverse edges). Using that forest, as above,
one can compute the presentation of the corresponding diagram groups, and their homology
groups. The Poincar´e series of the diagram groups of this complex are rational.
37


10
Rigidity
Recall that the ﬂat torus theorem [3, Theorem 7.1] says, in particular, that if X is a metric
space with CAT(0) universal cover ˜X and the fundamental group of X contains a copy of Zn,
then X contains a π1-embedded torus Rn/Zn.
Results of this section are of similar spirit: we prove that a diagram groupoid of a di-
rected 2-complex K contains certain diagram group G = D(S, p) if and only if there exists a
p-nonsingular morphism from S into K. Since every p-nonsingular morphism φ: S →K in-
duces a π1-injective continuous map Sq(S, p) →Sq(K, φ(p)), these results (and Theorem 3.4)
imply that if π1(Sq(K), u) contains a copy of G = π1(Sq(S), p) then there exists a π1-injective
continuous map from Sq(S, w) into Sq(K).
In general we say that a triple (diagram group G, directed 2-complex K, 1-path p in K) is
rigid if G = D(K, p) and for every directed complex K′ such that D(K′) contains a copy of G
there exists a p-nonsingular morphism of K into K′.
x
x
x
. . .
x
ι
τ
Figure 13.
For example, consider the directed 2-complex K on Figure 13 with two vertices ι and τ, one
edge x connecting ι with τ and positive 2-cells of the form x = x labelled by elements of some
set A. By Theorem 6.6 (or a straightforward computation), the diagram group G = D(K, x) is
the free group of rank |A|. It is easy to see (exercise) that the triple (G, K, x) is rigid.
A much more nontrivial example of a rigid triple involves the R. Thompson group F. Ex-
ample 6.8 shows that F is the diagram group of the Dunce hat H0.
The following proposition shows a remarkable property of the Dunce hat.
Theorem 10.1. Every morphism from the Dunce hat to any directed 2-complex K is nonsin-
gular.
Proof. Let us consider any morphism φ from H0 into a directed 2-complex K. We need to show
that it is p-nonsingular for every non-empty 1-path p in H0. Since for every such p, the diagram
groups D(H0, p) and D(H0, x5) are conjugate, it is enough to show that φ is x5-nonsingular.
Since x5 and x are homotopic, we have D(H0, x5) ∼= D(H0, x) ∼= F (see Example 6.8).
Since all proper homomorphic images of the group F are Abelian [13], it suﬃces to ﬁnd
an element in the derived subgroup of D(H0, x5) that is not in the kernel of φx5. Let Π be
the diagram over H0 corresponding to the atomic 2-path (1, f, 1), where f is the positive 2-cell
x2 = x in H0. Consider the diagram Ψ = ε(x) + Π + Π−1 + ε(x) from D(H0, x5). By Theorem
11.3 from [16], Ψ is in the derived subgroup of D(H0, x5) and is nontrivial. By Theorem 3.4,
we can assume that the diagram ∆= φx5(Π) is reduced. Since it is a (φ(x)2, φ(x))-diagram,
it is nontrivial. Then φx5(Ψ) = ε(φ(x)) + ∆+ ∆−1 + ε(φ(x)) is also a reduced and nontrivial
diagram, hence by Theorem 3.4, φx5(Ψ) ̸= 1.
Note that the same property is true for directed 2-complexes ⟨x | xr = x ⟩that correspond
to groups Fr (r ≥2), the generalizations of F (see [6, 16]). The proof is based on the same idea
(all proper homomorphic images of these groups are also Abelian).
38


Here is a reformulation of the main result of [18] which shows that the triple (F, H0, x) is
rigid.
Theorem 10.2. ([18]) Let K be a directed complex. Then the following conditions are equiva-
lent.
1. A diagram groupoid K contains an isomorphic copy of the R. Thompson group F.
2. The complex K contains a non-empty 1-path which is homotopic to its square.
3. There exists a (nonsingular) morphism from the Dunce hat to K.
Thus if the diagram groupoid of K contains a copy of F then it contains a naturally embedded
copy of F.
Another example of a rigid triple is given by [17, Theorem 24]. Let Q be the directed 2-
complex with three vertices, three edges x, y, z and three positive cells of the forms xy = x,
y = y, yz = z on Figure 14 (to obtain the complex from the diagram , we identify all edges
having the same labels).
It is proved in [17] that the diagram group D(Q, xyz) is isomorphic to the restricted wreath
product Z wr Z. Theorem 24 of [17] shows that the triple (Z wr Z, Q, xyz) is rigid.
s
s
s
s
x
x
y
z
y
z
Figure 14.
The free Abelian group Zn can participate in a rigid triple too (for every n ≥1). In fact,
using a description of commuting diagrams ([17, Theorem 17]) one can obtain a much more
precise result (Theorem 10.4 below).
Let Sn be the following directed 2-complex: take a simple path labelled by the word wn =
x1 · · · xn, where xi are letters and let us attach n positive 2-cells x1 = x1, . . . , xn = xn to it.
Thus Sn is a chain of n spheres (Figure 15).
. . .
x1
x1
x2
x2
xn
xn
Figure 15.
Then Sq(Sn, wn) is the n-dimensional torus (this is easy to check). Thus by Theorem 3.4, the
group D(Sn, wn) is isomorphic to Zn.
The next result is one of the most useful technical facts about diagram groups. In [17], it is
formulated and proved for diagrams over semigroup presentations (see [17, Theorem 24]). The
proof for directed complexes is completely similar (in fact it can be deduced from the result of
39


[17] by using subdivisions of complexes). It is similar to the well known theorem that commuting
matrices over an algebraically closed ﬁeld are simultaneously conjugate to their Jordan forms.
Lemma 10.3. Let K be a directed 2-complex and w be a non-empty 1-path in K. Suppose
that A1, . . . , An are spherical (w, w)-diagrams that pairwise commute in G. Then there exist a
1-path v = v1 . . . vm, spherical (vj, vj)-diagrams ∆j (1 ≤j ≤m) over K, integers dij (1 ≤i ≤n,
1 ≤j ≤m) and some (w, v)-diagram Γ over K such that
Γ−1AiΓ = ∆di1
1
+ · · · + ∆dim
m
for all 1 ≤i ≤n.
Theorem 10.4. The triple (Zn, Sn, wn) is rigid for every n ≥1. In addition, let K be a directed
2-complex. Then every copy of Zn in D(K) is conjugate in D(K) to a subgroup of a naturally
embedded copy of Zm for some m ≥n.
Proof. Suppose that a diagram group D(K, p) of some directed 2-complex contains a copy
G = ⟨A1, . . . , An ⟩of Zn. We use the notation from Lemma 10.3. Let us also assume that m is
chosen to be minimal. Then all diagrams ∆1, . . . , ∆m are nontrivial. Indeed, if we assume the
contrary, then m > 1 because G ̸= 1. If ∆i is trivial for some i, then one has i < m or i > 1.
Without loss of generality we assume that i < m. But now it would be possible to replace ∆i
by ∆i+1 taking into account that the power of a sum is the sum of powers and all powers of a
trivial diagram coincide.
Clearly, m ≥n (otherwise the rank of the subgroup generated by A1, . . . , An would be less
than n).
Now the map φ from Sm to K that sends the positive 2-cell xi = xi to the 2-path correspond-
ing to ∆i (1 ≤i ≤m), deﬁnes a morphism. The image of D(Sm, wm) under φwn is generated
by the diagrams ε(v1 · · · vi−1) + ∆i + ε(vi+1 · · · vm). Thus the image of φwm is isomorphic to
Zm. Therefore, φ is wm-nonsingular. Clearly, the naturally embedded copy φ(D(Sm, wm)) of
Zm contains Γ−1GΓ. This proves the second statement of the theorem.
In order to prove the rigidity statement, we just note that Sn is a subcomplex of Sm so
it maps into it nonsingularly. But we already have a nonsingular morphism of Sm into K. It
suﬃces to compose the morphisms.
Problem 10.5. It is interesting to characterize other diagram groups that can participate in
rigid triples. In particular, in view of rigidity of the triple (F, H0, x) it is natural to ask if the
analog is true for Hn. By Theorem 5.6, it is enough to prove that for n = 1. This would give a
characterization of universal directed 2-complexes as those admitting a nonsingular morphism
from H1.
References
[1] D. J. Anick. A counterexample to a conjecture of Serre. Ann. of Math. (2) 115 (1982), no.
1, 1–33.
[2] W. A. Bogley, S. J. Pride.
Calculating generators of Π2.
Two-dimensional homotopy
and combinatorial group theory, 157–188,
London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 197,
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1993.
40


[3] M. R. Bridson, Andr´e Haeﬂiger. Metric spaces of non-positive curvature. Grundlehren der
Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences], 319.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1999.
[4] M. G. Brin. The ubiquity of Thompson’s group F in groups of piecewise linear homeomor-
phisms of the unit interval. J. London Math. Soc. (2) 60 (1999), no. 2, 449–460.
[5] M. G. Brin and C. C. Squier. Groups of piecewise linear homeomorphisms of the real line.
Invent. Math. 79 (1985), 485–498.
[6] K. S. Brown. Finiteness properties of groups. J. of Pure and Applied Algebra 44 (1987),
45–75.
[7] K. S. Brown. Cohomology of groups. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 87. Springer-Verlag,
New York – Berlin, 1982.
[8] K. S. Brown. The geometry of rewriting systems: A proof of the Anick – Groves – Squier
theorem. In: Algorithms and classiﬁcation in combinatorial group theory (Berkeley, CA,
1989), 137–163, Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., 23, Springer, New York, 1992.
[9] K. S. Brown, R. Geoghegan. An inﬁnite-dimensional torsion-free FP∞group. Invent. Math.
77 (1984), no. 2, 367 – 381.
[10] Ronald Brown, Philip J. Higgins.
On the algebra of cubes. J. Pure Appl. Algebra 21
(1981), no. 3, 233–260.
[11] N. Chomsky, M. P. Sch¨utzenberger. The algebraic theory of context-free languages. Com-
puter programming and formal systems, pp. 118–161, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1963.
[12] Daniel E. Cohen. String rewriting — a survey for group theorists. In: Geometric group
theory, Vol. 1 (Sussex, 1991), 37–47. London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 181, Cambridge
Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1993.
[13] J. W. Cannon, W. J. Floyd, and W. R. Parry. Introductory notes on Richard Thompson’s
groups. Enseign. Math. (2) 42, no. 3–4 (1996), 215–256.
[14] D. Farley. Finiteness and CAT(0) properties of diagram groups. PhD Thesis, SUNY at
Binghamton, 2000.
[15] V. Guba. The Dehn function of Richard Thompson’s group F is quadratic (submitted).
[16] V. S. Guba, M. V. Sapir. Diagram groups. Memoirs of the Amer. Math. Soc. 130, no. 620
(1997), 1–117.
[17] V. S. Guba, M. V. Sapir. On subgroups of R. Thompson’s group F and other diagram
groups. Matem. Sb. 190: 8 (1999), 3–60. (Russian). English transl. in: Sbornik: Mathe-
matics 190: 8 (1999), 1077–1130.
[18] V. S. Guba. M. V. Sapir. Rigidity properties of diagram groups. Int. J. of Alg. and Comp.
12, no. 1 & 2 (2002), 9–17.
[19] V. S. Guba, M. V. Sapir.
Diagram groups are totally orderable, preprint, arXive
math.GR/0305153.
41


[20] Andre Joyal, Ross Street. The geometry of tensor calculus. I. Adv. Math. 88 (1991), no.
1, 55–112.
[21] E. V. Kashintsev. Graphs and the word problem for ﬁnitely presented semigroups. Uch.
Zap. Tul. Ped. Inst. 2 (1970), 290–302 (in Russian).
[22] V. Kilibarda. On the algebra of semigroup diagrams. PhD Thesis, Univ. of Nebraska –
Lincoln, 1994.
[23] V. Kilibarda. On the algebra of semigroup diagrams. Int. J. of Alg. and Comput. 7 (1997),
313–338.
[24] R. Lyndon, P. Schupp. Combinatorial group theory. Springer-Verlag, Berlin – Heidelberg
– New York, 1977.
[25] G. Lallement. Semigroups and combinatorial applications. Pure and Applied Mathematics.
A Wiley-Interscience Publication. John Wiley & Sons, New York – Chichester – Brisbane,
1979.
[26] S. J. Pride.
Geometric methods in combinatorial group theory.
In: J. Fountain ed.,
Semigroups, Formal Languages and Groups. Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht (1995), 215–
232.
[27] S. J. Pride, Jing Wang. Subgroups of ﬁnite index in groups with ﬁnite complete rewriting
systems. Proc. Edinburgh Math. Soc. (2) 43 (2000), no. 1, 177–183.
[28] J. H. Remmers. On the geometry of semigroup presentations. Advances in Math., (3) 36
(1980), 283–296.
[29] J.-P. Serre. Trees. Springer–Verlag, 1980.
[30] J.-P. Serre. Homologie singuli`ere des espaces ﬁbr´es. Applications. Ann. of Math. (2) 54
(1951), 425–505.
[31] A. J. Sieradski. Algebraic topology for two-dimensional complexes. Two-dimensional ho-
motopy and combinatorial group theory, 51–96, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 197,
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1993.
[32] J. R. Stallings. Topology of ﬁnite graphs. Invent. Math. 71 (1983), 551-565.
[33] R. Steiner. The algebra of directed complexes. Appl. Categ. Structures 1 (1993), no. 3,
247–284.
[34] B. Wiest. Diagram groups are left-orderable (submitted).
Victor Guba
Department of Mathematics
Vologda State University
guba@uni-vologda.ac.ru
Mark V. Sapir
Department of Mathematics
Vanderbilt University
msapir@math.vanderbilt.edu
42
