Circular Planar Electrical Networks I: The Electrical Poset EPn
Joshua Alman, Carl Lian, and Brandon TranŌłŚ
November 5, 2021
Abstract
Following de Verdi`ere-Gitler-Vertigan and Curtis-Ingerman-Morrow, we prove a host of new
results on circular planar electrical networks. We introduce a poset EPn of electrical networks
with n boundary vertices, giving two equivalent characterizations, one combinatorial and the
other topological. We then investigate various properties of the EPn, proving that it is graded
by number of edges of critical representatives. Finally, we answer various enumerative questions
related to EPn, adapting methods of Callan and Stein-Everett.
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Electrical Networks
3
2.1
Circular Planar Electrical Networks, up to equivalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Circular Pairs and Circular Minors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Critical Graphs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Medial Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
The Electrical Poset EPn
11
3.1
Construction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Gradedness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Toward Eulerianness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Enumerative Properties
17
4.1
Total size Xn = |EPn| . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Asymptotic Behavior of Xn = |EPn| . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Rank sizes |EPn,r|
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Acknowledgments
26
A Proofs of Lemmas 4.2.4 and 4.2.5
26
ŌłŚDepartment of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
jalman@mit.edu, clian@math.mit.edu,
btran115@mit.edu
1
arXiv:1309.2697v1  [math.CO]  11 Sep 2013


1
Introduction
Circular planar electrical networks are a natural generalization of an idea from classical physics:
that any electrical resistor network with two vertices connected to a battery behaves like one with
a single resistor. When we embed a resistor network in a disk and allow arbitrarily many boundary
vertices connected to batteries, the situation becomes more interesting.
An inverse boundary
problem for these electrical networks was studied in detail by de Verdi`ere-Gitler-Vertigan [dVGV]
and Curtis-Ingerman-Morrow [CIM]: given the response matrix of a network, that is, information
about how the network responds to voltages applied at the boundary vertices, can the network be
recovered?
In general, the answer is ŌĆ£no,ŌĆØ though much can be said about the information that can be
recovered. If, for example, the underlying graph of the electrical network is known and is critical, the
conductances (equivalently, resistances) can be uniquely recovered [CIM, Theorem 2]. Moreover,
any two networks which produce the same response matrix can be related by a certain class of
combinatorial transformations, the local equivalences [dVGV, Th┬┤eor`eme 4].
The goal of this paper is to study more closely the rich theory of circular planar electrical
networks. Speci’¼ücally, we de’¼üne a poset EPn of circular planar graphs, under the operations of
contraction and deletion of edges, and investigate its properties.
For instance, the poset EPn has an intricate topological structure. By [CIM, Theorem 4] and
[dVGV, Th┬┤eor`eme 3], the space of response matrices for circular planar electrical networks of order
n decomposes as a disjoint union of open cells, each di’¼Ćeomorphic to a product of copies of the
positive real line. In light of this decomposition, we can describe EPn as the poset of these cells
under containment of closure:
Theorem 3.1.3. [H] Ōēż[G] in EPn if and only if Ōä”(H) ŌŖéŌä”(G), where Ōä”(H) denotes the space of
response matrices for conductances on H.
Using the important tool of medial graphs developed in [CIM] and [dVGV], we also prove:
Theorem 3.2.4. EPn is graded by number of edges of critical representatives.
In the last part of the paper, we embark on a study of the enumerative properties of EPn. Me-
dial graphs bear a strong resemblance to certain objects whose enumerative properties are known:
stabilized-interval free (SIF) permutations, as studied by Callan [C], and irreducible linked dia-
grams, as studied by Stein-Everett [SE]. Exploiting this resemblance, we summarize and prove
analogues of known results in the following theorem:
Theorem 4.2.6. Put Xn = |EPn|, the number of equivalence classes of electrical networks of order
n. Then:
(a) X1 = 1 and
Xn = 2(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 +
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(j ŌłÆ1)XjXnŌłÆj.
(b) [tnŌłÆ1]X(t)n = n ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ3)!!, where X(t) is the generating function for the sequence {Xi}.
(c) Xn/(2n ŌłÆ1)!! ŌåÆeŌłÆ1/2 as n ŌåÆŌł×.
The roadmap of the paper is as follows. In an attempt to keep the exposition as self-contained as
possible, we carefully review terminology and known results in ┬¦2, where we also establish some basic
2


properties of electrical networks. In ┬¦3, we de’¼üne the poset EPn, and establish the equivalence of
our two characterizations in Theorem 3.1.3. We then prove Theorem 3.2.4, and investigate various
conjectural properties of EPn, such as Eulerianness. The study of enumerative properties of EPn
is undertaken in ┬¦4, where we prove the three parts of Theorem 4.2.6, and conclude by studying
the rank sizes |EPn,r|.
2
Electrical Networks
We begin a systematic discussion of electrical networks by recalling various notions and results
from [CIM].
We will also introduce some new terminology and conventions which will aid our
exposition, in some cases deviating from [CIM].
2.1
Circular Planar Electrical Networks, up to equivalence
De’¼ünition 2.1.1. A circular planar graph ╬ō is a planar graph embedded in a disk D. ╬ō is
allowed to have self-loops and multiple edges, and has at least one vertex on the boundary of D -
such vertices are called boundary vertices. A circular planar electrical network is a circular
planar graph ╬ō, together with a conductance map ╬│ : E(╬ō) ŌåÆR>0.
To avoid cumbersome language, we will henceforth refer to these objects as electrical net-
works. We will also call the number of boundary vertices of an electrical network (or a circular
planar graph) its order.
We can interpret this construction as an electrical network in the physical sense, with a resistor
existing on each edge e with conductance ╬│(e).
Electrical networks satisfy OhmŌĆÖs Law and
Kirchho’¼ĆŌĆÖs Laws, classical physical phenomena which we neglect to explain in detail here. Given
an electrical network (╬ō, ╬│), suppose that we apply electrical potentials at each of the boundary
vertices V1, . . . , Vn, inducing currents through the network. Then, we get a map f : Rn ŌåÆRn, where
f sends the potentials (p1, . . . , pn) applied at the vertices V1, . . . , Vn to the currents (i1, . . . , in)
observed at V1, . . . , Vn. We will take currents going out of the boundary to be negative and those
going in to the boundary to be positive.
Remark 2.1.2. The convention for current direction above is the opposite of that used in [CIM],
but we will prefer it for the ensuing elegance of the statement of Theorem 2.2.6a.
In fact, f is linear (see [CIM, ┬¦1]), and we have natural bases for the spaces of applied voltages
and observed currents at the boundary vertices. Thus, we can make the following de’¼ünition:
De’¼ünition 2.1.3. Given an electrical network (╬ō, ╬│), de’¼üne the response matrix of the network
to be the linear map f constructed above from applied voltages to observed currents, in terms of
the natural bases indexed by the boundary vertices.
De’¼ünition 2.1.4. Two electrical networks (╬ō1, ╬│1), (╬ō2, ╬│2) are equivalent if they have the same
response matrix.
In other words, the two networks cannot be distinguished only by applying
voltages at the boundary vertices and observing the resulting currents. The equivalence relation is
denoted by Ōł╝.
We will study electrical networks up to equivalence. We have an important class of combina-
torial transformations that may be applied to electrical networks, known as local equivalences,
described below. These transformations may be seen to be equivalences by applications of OhmŌĆÖs
and Kirchho’¼ĆŌĆÖs Laws. Note that all of these local equivalences may be performed in reverse.
3


v1
v2
v3
w
v1
v2
v3
ŌåÉŌåÆ
Figure 1: Y-Ōłåtransformation.
1. Self-loop and spike removal. Self-loops (cycles of length 1) and spikes (edges adjoined to
non-boundary vertices of degree 1) of any conductances may always be removed.
2. Replacement of edges in parallel. Two edges e1, e2 between with common endpoints v, w
may be replaced by a single edge of conductance ╬│(e1) + ╬│(e2).
3. Replacement of edges in series. Two edges v1w, wv2 (v1 ╠Ė= v2) meeting at a vertex w of
degree 2 may be replaced by a single edge v1v2 of conductance ((╬│(v1w)ŌłÆ1 + ╬│(wv2)ŌłÆ1)ŌłÆ1.
4. Y-Ōłåtransformations. (See Figure 1) Three edges v1w, v2w, v3w meeting at a non-boundary
vertex w of degree 3 may be replaced by three edges v1v2, v2v3, v3v1, of conductances
╬│1╬│2
╬│1 + ╬│2 + ╬│3
,
╬│2╬│3
╬│1 + ╬│2 + ╬│3
,
╬│3╬│1
╬│1 + ╬│2 + ╬│3
,
where ╬│i denotes the conductance ╬│(viw).
In fact, local equivalences are su’¼ācient to generate equivalence of electrical networks:
Theorem 2.1.5 ([dVGV, Th┬┤eor`eme 4]). Two electrical networks are equivalent if and only if they
are related by a sequence of local equivalences.
When dealing with electrical networks, we will sometimes avoid making any reference to the
conductance map ╬│, and instead consider just the underlying circular planar graph ╬ō. In doing so,
we will abuse terminology by calling circular planar graphs ŌĆ£electrical networks.ŌĆØ In practice, we
will only use the following notion of equivalence on circular planar graphs:
De’¼ünition 2.1.6. Let ╬ō1, ╬ō2 be circular planar graphs, each with the same number of boundary
vertices. Then, ╬ō1, ╬ō2 are equivalent if there exist conductances ╬│1, ╬│2 on ╬ō1, ╬ō2, respectively
such that (╬ō1, ╬│1), (╬ō2, ╬│2) are equivalent electrical networks.
As with electrical networks, this
equivalence is denoted Ōł╝.
It is clear that we may still apply local equivalences with this notion of equivalence. Furthermore,
we have an analogue of Theorem 2.1.5: two circular planar graphs are equivalent if and only if they
can be related by local equivalences, where we ŌĆ£forgetŌĆØ the conductances.
2.2
Circular Pairs and Circular Minors
Circular pairs and circular minors are central to the characterization of response matrices.
4


De’¼ünition 2.2.1. Let P = {p1, p2, . . . , pk} and Q = {q1, q2, . . . , qk} be disjoint ordered subsets
of the boundary vertices of an electrical network (╬ō, ╬│). We say that (P; Q) is a circular pair if
p1, . . . , pk, qk, . . . , q1 are in clockwise order around the circle. We will refer to k as the size of the
circular pair.
Remark 2.2.2. We will take (P; Q) to be the same circular pair as ( eQ; eP), where eP denotes
the ordered set P with its elements reversed. Almost all of our de’¼ünitions and statements are
compatible with this convention; most notably, by Theorem 2.2.6a, because response matrices are
positive, the circular minors M(P; Q) and M( eQ; eP) are the same. Whenever there is a question as
to the e’¼Ćect of choosing either (P; Q) or ( eQ; eP), we take extra care to point the possible ambiguity.
De’¼ünition 2.2.3. Let (P; Q) and (╬ō, ╬│) be as in De’¼ünition 2.2.1. We say that there is a connection
from P to Q in ╬ō if there exists a collection of vertex-disjoint paths from pi to qi in ╬ō, and
furthermore each path in the collection contains no boundary vertices other than its endpoints. We
denote the set of circular pairs (P; Q) for which P is connected to Q by ŽĆ(╬ō).
De’¼ünition 2.2.4. Let (P; Q) and (╬ō, ╬│) be as in De’¼ünition 2.2.1, and let M be the response
matrix. We de’¼üne the circular minor associated to (P; Q) to be the determinant of the k ├Ś k
matrix M(P; Q) with M(P; Q)i,j = Mpi,qj.
Remark 2.2.5. We will sometimes refer to submatrices and their determinants both as minors,
interchangeably. In all instances, it will be clear from context which we mean.
We are interested in circular minors and connections because of the following result from [CIM]:
Theorem 2.2.6. Let M be an n ├Ś n matrix. Then:
(a) M is the response matrix for an electrical network (╬ō, ╬│) if and only if M is symmetric with
row and column sums equal zero, and each of the circular minors M(P; Q) is non-negative.
(b) If M is the response matrix for an electrical network (╬ō, ╬│), the positive circular minors
M(P; Q) are exactly those for which there is a connection from P to Q.
Proof. (a) is immediate from [CIM, Theorem 4], which we will state as Theorem 2.3.6 later. (b)
is [CIM, Theorem 4.2]. Note that, because we have declared current going into the circle to be
negative, we do not have the extra factors of (ŌłÆ1)k as in [CIM].
We now de’¼üne two operations on the circular planar graphs and electrical networks.
Each
operation decreases the total number of edges by one.
De’¼ünition 2.2.7. Let G be a circular planar graph, and let e be an edge with endpoints v, w.
The deletion of e from G is exactly as named; the edge e is removed while leaving the rest of the
vertices and edges of G unchanged. If v, w are not both boundary vertex of G, we may also perform
a contraction of e, which identi’¼ües all points of e. If exactly one of v, w is a boundary vertex,
then the image of e under the contraction is a boundary vertex. Note that edges connecting two
boundary vertices cannot be contracted to either endpoint. See Figure 2.
5


e
(a) A circular planar graph G
(b) The deletion of edge e from
G
(c) The contraction of edge e
from G
Figure 2: An example of a deletion and a contraction
2.3
Critical Graphs
In this section, we introduce critical graphs, a particular class of circular planar graphs.
De’¼ünition 2.3.1. Let G be a circular planar graph. G is said to be critical if, for any removal of
an edge via deletion or contraction, there exists a circular pair (P; Q) for which P is connected to
Q through G before the edge removal, but not afterward.
Theorem 2.3.2 ([dVGV, Th┬┤eor`eme 2]). Every equivalence class of circular planar graphs has a
critical representative.
Theorem 2.3.3 ([CIM, Theorem 1]). Suppose G1, G2 are critical. Then, G1 and G2 are Y-Ōłå
equivalent (that is, related by a sequence of Y-Ōłåtransformations) if and only if ŽĆ(G1) = ŽĆ(G2).
Proposition 2.3.4. Let G1, G2 be arbitrary circular planar graphs. Then, G1 Ōł╝G2 if and only if
ŽĆ(G1) = ŽĆ(G2).
Proof. By Theorem 2.1.5, if G1 Ōł╝G2, then G1 and G2 are related by a sequence of local equiva-
lences. All local equivalences preserve ŽĆ(ŌłÆ); indeed, we have the claim for Y-Ōłåtransformations by
Theorem 2.3.3, and it is easy to check for all other local equivalences. It follows that ŽĆ(G1) = ŽĆ(G2).
In the other direction, by Theorem 2.3.2, there exist critical graphs H1, H2 such that G1 Ōł╝H1
and G2 Ōł╝H2. By similar logic from the previous paragraph, we have ŽĆ(H1) = ŽĆ(G1) = ŽĆ(G2) =
ŽĆ(H2), and thus, by Theorem 2.3.3, H1 Ōł╝H2. It follows that G1 Ōł╝G2, so we are done.
De’¼ünition 2.3.5. Fix a set B of n boundary vertices on a disk D. For any set of circular minors
ŽĆ, let Ōä”(ŽĆ) denote the set of response matrices whose, with the set of positive minors being exactly
those corresponding to the elements ŽĆ. We will refer to the sets Ōä”(ŽĆ) as cells, in light of the
theorem that follows.
Theorem 2.3.6 ([CIM, Theorem 4]). Suppose that G is critical and has N edges. Put ŽĆ = ŽĆ(G).
Then, the map rG : RN
>0 ŌåÆŌä”(ŽĆ), taking the conductances on the edges of G to the resulting response
matrix, is a di’¼Ćeomorphism.
It follows that the space of response matrices for electrical networks of order n is the disjoint
union of the cells Ōä”(ŽĆ), some of which are empty.
The non-empty cells Ōä”(ŽĆ) are those which
correspond to critical graphs G with ŽĆ(G) = ŽĆ. We will describe how these cells are attached to
each other in Proposition 3.1.2.
6


Remark 2.3.7. Later, we will prefer (e.g.
in Proposition 3.1.2) to index these cells by their
underlying (equivalence classes of) circular planar graphs, referring to them as Ōä”(G). Thus, Ōä”(G)
denotes the set response matrices for conductances on G.
Let us now characterize critical graphs in more conceptual ways. We quote a fourth character-
ization using medial graphs in Theorem 2.4.2.
Theorem 2.3.8. Let (╬ō, ╬│) be an electrical network. The following are equivalent:
(1) ╬ō is critical.
(2) Given the response matrix M of (╬ō, ╬│), ╬│ can uniquely be recovered from M and ╬ō.
(3) ╬ō has the minimal number of edges among elements of its equivalence class.
Proof. By [CIM, Lemma 13.2], (1) and (2) are equivalent. We now prove that (3) implies (1). Sup-
pose for sake of contradiction ╬ō has the minimal number of edges among elements of its equivalence
class, but is not critical. Then, there exists some edge that may be contracted or deleted to give ╬ōŌĆ▓,
such that ŽĆ(╬ō) = ŽĆ(╬ōŌĆ▓). Then, by Proposition 2.3.4, we have ╬ōŌĆ▓ Ōł╝╬ō, contradicting the minimality
of the number of edges of ╬ō.
Finally, to see that (1) implies (3), suppose for sake of contradiction that ╬ō is critical and
equivalent to a graph ╬ōŌĆ▓ with a strictly fewer edges. ╬ōŌĆ▓ cannot be critical, or else ╬ō and ╬ōŌĆ▓ would
be Y-Ōłåequivalent and thus have an equal number of edges. However, if ╬ōŌĆ▓ is not critical, we also
have a contradiction by the previous paragraph. The result follows.
2.4
Medial Graphs
One of our main tools in studying circular planar graphs (and thus, electrical networks) will be
their medial graphs. In a sense, medial graphs are the dual object to circular planar graphs. See
Figure 3 for examples.
Let G be a circular planar graph with n boundary vertices; color all vertices of G black, for
convenience. Then, for each boundary vertex, add two red vertices to the boundary circle, one on
either side, as well as a red vertex on each edge of G. We then construct the medial graph of G,
denoted M(G), as follows.
Take the set of red vertices to be the vertex set of M(G). Two red non-boundary vertices in
M(G) are connected by an edge if and only if their associated edges share a vertex and border the
same face. Then, the red boundary vertices are each connected to exactly one other red vertex:
if the red boundary vertex r lies clockwise from its associated black boundary vertex b, then r is
connected to the red vertex associated to the ’¼ürst edge in clockwise order around b after the arc rb.
Similarly, if r lies counterclockwise from b, we connect r to the red vertex associated to the ’¼ürst
edge in counterclockwise order around b after the arc rb. Note that if no edges of G are incident at
b, then the two red vertices associated to b are connected by an edge of M(G).
We will refer to the red vertices on the boundary circle as medial boundary vertices, as
to distinguish them from the black boundary vertices, a term we will reserve for the boundary
vertices of the original circular planar graph (electrical network). The order of a medial graph is
the order of its underlying electrical network.
Note that the medial boundary vertices of M(G) have degree 1, and all other vertices have
degree 4. Thus, we may form geodesics in M(G) in the following way. Starting at each medial
boundary vertex, draw a path e1e2 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę en (labeled by its edges) so that if the edge ei ends at the
non-medial boundary vertex v, the edge ei+1 is taken to be the edge with endpoint v such that the
7


b1
b2
b3
b4
b1
b2
b3
b4
b5
b6
i2
i1
i3
i4
i5
i1
i2
i3
Figure 3: Medial Graphs
ŌåÉŌåÆ
Figure 4: Motions
edges ei and ei+1 separate the other two edges incident at v. The geodesic ends when it reaches
a second boundary vertex. The remaining geodesics are constructed in a similar way, but do not
start and end at boundary vertices: instead, they must be ’¼ünite cycles inside the circle.
For example, in Figure 3, we have three geodesics in the right hand diagram: b1b4, b2b5, and
b3b6, where here we label the geodesics by their vertices. In the left hand diagram, we have the
geodesics b1b3, b2b4, and i1i2i3i4.
De’¼ünition 2.4.1. Two geodesics are said to form a lens if they intersect at distinct p1 and p2, in
such a way that they do not intersect between p1 and p2. A medial graph is said to be lensless if
all geodesics connect two medial boundary vertices (that is, no geodesics are cycles), and no two
geodesics form a lens.
The local equivalences of electrical networks may easily be translated into operations on their
medial graphs.
Most importantly, Y-Ōłåtransformations become motions, as shown in 4, and
replacing series or parallel edges with a single edge both correspond to resolution of lenses, as
shown in Figure 5. Note, however, that a lens may only be resolved if no other geodesics pass
through the lens. De’¼üning two medial graphs to be equivalent if their underlying circular planar
graphs are equivalent, we obtain an analogue of Theorem 2.1.5.
The power of medial graphs lies in the following theorem:
Theorem 2.4.2 ([CIM, Lemma 13.1]). G is critical if and only if M(G) is lensless.
In particular, if G is critical, the geodesics of M(G) consist only n ŌĆ£wiresŌĆØ connecting pairs of
the 2n boundary medial vertices. Thus, any critical graph G gives a perfect matching of the medial
boundary vertices. Furthermore, suppose H Ōł╝G is critical. By Theorem 2.3.3 and Proposition
2.3.4, G and H are related by Y-Ōłåtransformations, so M(G) and M(H) are related by motions.
In particular, M(G) and M(H) match the same pairs of boundary medial vertices, so we have a
well-de’¼üned map from critical circular planar graph equivalence classes to matchings. In fact, this
map is injective:
8


ŌłÆŌåÆ
ŌłÆŌåÆ
Figure 5: Resolution of Lenses
Proposition 2.4.3. Suppose that the geodesics of two lensless medial graphs M(G), M(H) match
the same pairs of medial boundary vertices. Then, the medial M(G) and M(H) are related by
motions, or equivalently, G and H are Y-Ōłåequivalent.
Proof. Implicit in [CIM, Theorem 7.2].
De’¼ünition 2.4.4. Given the boundary vertices of a circular planar graph embedded in a disk D,
take 2n medial boundary vertices as before. A wiring diagram is collection of n smooth curves
(wires) embedded in D, each of which connects a pair of medial boundary vertices in such a way
that each medial boundary vertex has exactly one incident wire. We require that wiring diagrams
have no triple crossings or self-loops. As with electrical networks and medial graphs, the order of
the wiring diagram is de’¼üned to be equal to n.
It is immediate from Proposition 2.4.3 that, given a set of boundary vertices, perfect matchings
on the set of medial boundary vertices are in bijection with motion-equivalence classes of lensless
wiring diagrams. Thus, we have an injection G 7ŌåÆM(G) from critical graph equivalence classes to
motion-equivalence classes of lensless wiring diagram, but this map is not surjective. We describe
the image of this injection in the next de’¼ünition:
De’¼ünition 2.4.5. Given boundary vertices V1, . . . , Vn and a wiring diagram W on the same bound-
ary circle, a dividing line for W is a line ViVj with i ╠Ė= j such that there does not exist a wire
connecting two points on opposite sides of ViVj. The wiring diagram is called full if it has no
dividing lines.
It is obvious that fullness is preserved under motions. Now, suppose that we have a lensless full
wiring diagram W; we now de’¼üne a critical graph E(W). Let D be the disk in which our wiring
diagram is embedded. The wires of W divide D in to faces, and it is well-known that these faces
can be colored black and white such that neighboring faces have opposite colors.
The condition that W be full means that each face contains at most one boundary vertex. Fur-
thermore, all boundary vertices are contained in faces of the same color; without loss of generality,
assume that this color is black. Then place an additional vertex inside each black face which does
not contain a boundary vertex. The boundary vertices, in addition to these added interior vertices,
form the vertex set for E(W). Finally, two vertices of E(W) are connected by an edge if and only if
their corresponding faces share a common point on their respective boundaries, which must be an
intersection p of two wires of W. This edge is drawn as to pass through p. An example is shown in
Figure 6.
9


Figure 6: Recovering an electrical network from its (lensless) medial graph.
ŌłÆŌåÆ
ŌłÆŌåÆ
Figure 7: Breaking a crossing, in two ways.
It is straightforward to check that M and E are inverse maps. We have thus proven the following
result:
Theorem 2.4.6. The associations G 7ŌåÆM(G) and W 7ŌåÆE(W) are inverse bijections between
equivalence classes of critical graphs and motion-equivalence classes of full lensless wiring diagrams.
Finally, let us discuss the analogues of contraction and deletion in medial graphs. Each operation
corresponds to the breaking of a crossing, as shown in Figure 7. A crossing may be broken in
two ways: breaking outward from the corresponding edge of the underlying electrical network
corresponds to contraction, and breaking along the edge corresponds to deletion. In the same way
that contraction or deletion of an edge in a critical graph is not guaranteed to yield a critical graph,
breaking a crossing in lensless medial graphs does not necessarily yield a lensless medial graph.
Not all breakings of crossings are valid, as some crossings may be broken in a particular way
to create a dividing line. In fact, it is straightforward to check that creating a dividing line by
breaking a crossing corresponds to contracting a boundary edge, which we also do not allow. Thus,
we allow all breakings of crossings as long as no dividing lines are created; such breakings are called
legal.
10


3
The Electrical Poset EPn
We now consider EPn, the poset of circular planar graphs under contraction and deletion.
We will ’¼ünd that, equivalently, EPn is the poset of disjoint cells Ōä”(G) (see Remark 2.3.7) under
containment in closure.
3.1
Construction
Before constructing EPn, we need a lemma to guarantee that the order relation will be well-
de’¼üned.
Lemma 3.1.1. Let G be a circular planar graph, and suppose that H can be obtained from G by
a sequence of contractions and deletions. Consider a circular planar graph GŌĆ▓ with GŌĆ▓ Ōł╝G. Then,
there exists a sequence of contractions and deletions starting from GŌĆ▓ whose result is some HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H.
Proof. By induction, we may assume that H can be obtained from G by one contraction or one
deletion. Furthermore, by Theorem 2.1.5, we may assume by induction that G and GŌĆ▓ are related
by a local equivalence. If this local equivalence is the deletion of a self-loop or boundary spike, the
result is trivial. Next, suppose GŌĆ▓ is be obtained from G by one Y-Ōłåtransformation. We have
several cases: in each, let the vertices of the Y (and Ōłå) to which the transformation is applied be
A, B, C, and let the central vertex of the Y, which may be in G or GŌĆ▓ be P. In each case, if the
deleted or contracted edge of G is outside the Y or Ōłå, it is clear that the same edge-removal may
be performed in GŌĆ▓.
ŌĆó Suppose that a Y in G may be transformed to a Ōłåin GŌĆ▓, and that H is obtained from G by
contraction, without loss of generality, of AP. Then, deleting the edge BC from GŌĆ▓ yields
HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H.
ŌĆó Suppose that a Y in G may be transformed to a Ōłåin GŌĆ▓, and that H is obtained from G
by deletion, without loss of generality, of AP. Then, deleting AB and AC from GŌĆ▓ yields
HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H.
ŌĆó Suppose that a Ōłåin G may be transformed to a Y in GŌĆ▓, and that H is obtained from G by
deletion, without loss of generality, of AB. Then, contracting CP in GŌĆ▓ yields HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H.
ŌĆó Suppose that a Ōłåin G may be transformed to a Y in GŌĆ▓, and that H is obtained from G by
deletion, without loss of generality, of AB. Then, contracting AP to A and AB to B in GŌĆ▓
yields HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H.
Next, consider the case in which we have parallel edges e, f connecting the vertices A, B in G,
and that GŌĆ▓ is obtained by removing e (analogous to replacing the parallel edges by a single edge).
If, in G, we contract or delete an edge not connecting A and B to get H, we can perform the same
operation in GŌĆ▓ and then delete E to get HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H. If, instead, we contract an edge between A
and B to get H from G, we perform the same operation in GŌĆ▓, and then delete e, which became
a self-loop. Finally, if we delete an edge between A and B to get H, then we can delete the same
edge in GŌĆ▓ to get H, unless e is deleted from G, in which case we can take HŌĆ▓ = H.
Now, suppose GŌĆ▓ can be obtained from G by adding an edge e in parallel to an edge already in
G. Then, if we contract or delete an edge f in G to get H, we can perform the same operation in
GŌĆ▓, then delete e, to get HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H.
The case in which GŌĆ▓ and G are related by contracting an edge in series with another edge follows
from a similar argument. We have exhausted all local equivalences, completing the proof.
11


Figure 8: EP3
For distinct equivalence classes [G], [H], we may now de’¼üne [H] < [G] if, given any G Ōłł[G],
there exists a sequence of contractions and deletions that may be applied to G to obtain an element
of [H]. We thus have a (well-de’¼üned) electrical poset of order n, denoted EPn, of equivalence
classes of circular planar graphs or order n. If H Ōłł[H] and G Ōłł[G] with [H] < [G], we will write
H < G.
Figure 8 shows EP3, with elements represented as medial graphs (left) and electrical networks
(right). Theorem 2.3.2 guarantees that the electrical networks may be taken to be critical. Note
that EP3 is isomorphic to the Boolean Lattice B3, because all critical graphs of order 3 arise from
taking edge-subsets of the top graph.
Let us now give an alternate description of the poset EPn. Associated to each circular planar
graph G, we have an open cell Ōä”(G) of response matrices for conductances on G, where Ōä”(G) is
taken to be a subset of the space Ōä”n of symmetric n ├Ś n matrices. It is clear that, if G Ōł╝GŌĆ▓, we
have, by de’¼ünition, Ōä”(G) = Ōä”(GŌĆ▓).
Proposition 3.1.2. Let G be a circular planar graph. Then,
Ōä”(G) =
G
HŌēżG
Ōä”(H),
(3.1.1)
where Ōä”(G) denotes the closure of Ōä”(G) in Ōä”n, and the union is taken over equivalence classes of
circular planar graphs H ŌēżG in EPn.
Because the Ōä”(G) are pairwise disjoint when we restrict ourselves to equivalence classes of
circular planar graphs (a consequence of Theorems 2.2.6 and 2.3.3), we get:
Theorem 3.1.3. [H] Ōēż[G] in EPn if and only if Ōä”(H) ŌŖéŌä”(G).
12


Proof of Proposition 3.1.2. Without loss of generality, we may take G to be critical. Let N be
the number of edges of G.
By 2.3.6, the map rG : RN
>0 ŌåÆŌä”(G) ŌŖéŌä”n, sending a collection
of conductances of the edges of G the resulting response matrix, is a di’¼Ćeomorphism. We will
describe a procedure for producing a response matrix for any electrical network whose underlying
graph H is obtainable from G by a sequence of contractions and deletions (that is, H ŌēżG).
Given ╬│ ŌłłRN
>0, write ╬│ = (╬│1, . . . , ╬│N). Note that for each i Ōłł[1, N] and ’¼üxed conductances
╬│1, . . . , b╬│i, . . . , ╬│n, the limit lim╬│iŌåÆ0 rG(╬│) must exist; indeed, sending the conductance ╬│i to zero is
equivalent to deleting its associated edge. This fact is most easily seen by physical reasoning: an
edge of zero conductance has no current ’¼éowing through it, and thus the network may as well not
have this edge. Thus, lim╬│iŌåÆ0 rG(╬│) is just rGŌĆ▓(╬│1, . . . , b╬│i, . . . , ╬│n), where GŌĆ▓ is the result of deleting
e from G. Similarly, we ’¼ünd that lim╬│iŌåÆŌł×rG(╬│) is rGŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓(╬│1, . . . , ╦å╬│i, . . . , ╬│n), where GŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ is the result
of contracting e.
It follows easily, then, that for all H which can be obtained from G by a contraction or deletion,
we have Ōä”(H) ŌŖéŌä”(G), because, by the previous paragraph, Ōä”(H) = Im(rH) ŌŖéŌä”(G). By induction,
we have the same for all H ŌēżG.
It is left to check that any M ŌłłŌä”(G) is in some cell Ōä”(H) with H ŌēżG. We have that M is a
limit of response matrices M1, M2, . . . ŌłłŌä”(G). The determinants of the circular minors of M are
limits of determinants of the same minors of the Mi, and thus non-negative. It follows that M is
the response matrix for some network H, that is, M ŌłłŌä”(H). We claim that H ŌēżG, which will
’¼ünish the proof.
Consider the sequence {Ck} de’¼üned by Ck = rŌłÆ1
G (Mk), which is a sequence of conductances on
G. For each edge e ŌłłG, we get a sequence {C(e)k} of conductances of e in {Ck}. It is then a con-
sequence of the continuity of rG, rŌłÆ1
G , and the existence of the limits lim╬│iŌåÆ0 rG(╬│), lim╬│iŌåÆŌł×rG(╬│),
that the sequences {C(e)k} each converge to a ’¼ünite nonnegative limit or otherwise go to +Ōł×.
Furthermore, we claim that for a boundary edge e (that is, one that connects two boundary
vertices), {C(e)k} cannot tend to +Ōł×.
Suppose, instead, that such is the case, that for some
boundary edge e = ViVj, we have C(e)k ŌåÆŌł×. Then, note that imposing a positive voltage at Vi
and and zero voltage at all other boundary vertices sends the current measurement at Vi to ŌłÆŌł×as
C(e)k ŌåÆŌł×. In particular, our sequence M1, M2, . . . cannot converge, so we have a contradiction.
To ’¼ünish, it is clear, for example, using similar ideas to the proof of the ’¼ürst direction, that
contracting the edges e for which C(e)k ŌåÆŌł×(which can be done because such e cannot be
boundary edges) and deleting those for which C(e)k ŌåÆ0 yields H. The proof is complete.
3.2
Gradedness
In this section, we prove our ’¼ürst main theorem, that EPn is graded.
Proposition 3.2.1. [G] covers [H] in EPn if and only if, for a critical representative G Ōłł[G], an
edge of G may be contracted or deleted to obtain a critical graph in [H].
Proof. First, suppose that G and H are critical graphs such that deleting or contracting an edge
of G yields H. Then, if [G] > [X] > [H] for some circular planar graph X, some sequence of at
least two deletions or contractions of G yields HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H. It is clear that HŌĆ▓ has fewer edges than H,
contradicting Theorem 2.3.8. It follows that [G] covers [H].
We now proceed to prove the opposite direction. Fix a critical graph G, and let e be an edge
of G that can be deleted or contracted in such a way that the resulting graph H is not critical. By
way of Lemmas 3.2.2 and 3.2.3, we will ’¼ürst construct T Ōł╝G with certain properties, then, from
T, construct a graph GŌĆ▓ such that [G] > [GŌĆ▓] > [H]. The desired result will then follow: indeed,
13


suppose that [G] covers [H] and G Ōłł[G] is critical. Then, there exists an edge e ŌłłG which may
be contracted or deleted to yield H Ōłł[H], and it will also be true that H is critical.
First, we translate to the language of medial graphs. When we break a crossing in the medial
graph M(G), we may create lenses that must be resolved to produce a lensless medial graph.
Suppose that our deletion or contraction of e ŌłłG corresponds to breaking the crossing between the
geodesics ab and cd in M(G), where the points a, c, b, d appear in clockwise order on the boundary
circle. Let ab Ōł®cd = p, and suppose that when the crossing at p is broken, the resulting geodesics
are ad and cb.
For what follows, let F = {f1, . . . , fk} denote the set of geodesics fi in M(G) such that fi
intersects ab between a and p, and also intersects cd between d and p. We now construct T in two
steps.
Lemma 3.2.2. There exists a lensless medial graph K such that:
ŌĆó K is equivalent to M(G),
ŌĆó geodesics ab and cd still intersect at p, and breaking the crossing at p to give geodesics ad, bc
yields a medial graph equivalent to M(H), and
ŌĆó for fi, fj ŌłłF which cross each other, the crossing fi Ōł®fj lies outside the sector apd.
Proof. The proof is similar to that of [CIM, Lemma 6.2]. Start with the medial graph M(G), and
for each fi ŌłłF, let vi = fi Ōł®ab. Also, for each fi ŌłłF which intersects another fj ŌłłF in the sector
apd, let Di be the closest point of intersection of some fj along fi to vi in apd. Let D be the set
of Di.
If D is empty, there is nothing to check, so we assume that D is nonempty. Then, consider
the subgraph of M(GŌĆ▓) obtained by restricting to the geodesics in F, along with ab and cd. In
this subgraph, choose a point Di ŌłłD such that the number r of regions within the con’¼üguration
formed by fi, fj, and ap is a minimum, where fj denotes the other geodesic passing through Di.
We claim that r = 1: assume otherwise.
Then, there exists a geodesic fk intersecting fj
between vj and Di and intersecting ap between vi and vj, as, by de’¼ünition, Di is the ’¼ürst point of
intersection on fi after vi. However, the area enclosed by fk, fj, and ap a number of regions strictly
fewer than r. Hence, we could instead have chosen the point Dj ŌłłD, with Dj ╠Ė= Di, contradicting
the minimality.
It follows that ap, fi, and fj form a triangle, and thus the crossing at Di may be moved out of
sector apd by a motion. Iterating this process, a ’¼ünite number of motions may be applied in such
so that no fi, fj ŌłłF intersect in the sector apd. After applying these motions, we obtain a medial
graph K equivalent to M(GŌĆ▓) satisfying the ’¼ürst and third properties.
It is easy to see that K also satis’¼ües the second property, as none of the motions involved
use the crossing at p. Thus, if we translate the sequence of motions into Y-Ōłåtransformations on
circular planar graphs, starting with G, no Y-Ōłåtransformation is applied involving the edge e
corresponding to p. Thus, deleting or contracting e commutes with the Y-Ōłåtransformations we
have performed.
It now su’¼āces to consider the graph K. Let f1 ŌłłF be the geodesic intersecting ab at the point
v1 closest to p, and let w1 = f1 Ōł®cd.
Lemma 3.2.3. There exists a lensless medial graph KŌĆ▓ Ōł╝K, such that:
ŌĆó geodesics ab and cd intersect at p, as before, and breaking the crossing at p to give geodesics
ad, bc yields a medial graph equivalent to M(H), and
14


ŌĆó No other geodesic of KŌĆ▓ enters the triangle with vertices v1, p, w1.
Proof. We ’¼ürst consider the set X of geodesics that only intersect cd and f1. With an argument
similar to that of Lemma 3.2.2, we may ’¼ürst apply motions so that any intersection of two elements
X occurs outside the triangle with vertices v1, p, w1. Then, we may apply motions at w1 to move
each of the geodesics in X outside of this triangle, so that they intersect f1 in the sector bpd. After
applying similar motions to the set of geodesics Y intersecting ab and f1, we have KŌĆ▓. The fact that
KŌĆ▓ satis’¼ües the ’¼ürst desired property follows from the same argument as that of Lemma 3.2.3.
We are now ready to ’¼ünish the proof of Proposition 3.2.1. Let T = E(KŌĆ▓) (see Theorem 2.4.6).
Then, in T, because of the properties of KŌĆ▓, contracting e to form the graph HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H forms a pair
of parallel edges. Replacing the parallel edges with a single edge gives a circular planar graph HŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓,
which is still equivalent to H. Suppose that e has endpoints B, C and the edges in parallel are
formed with A. Then, we have the triangle ABC in T.
Write S = ŽĆ(T) (see De’¼ünition 2.2.3) and SŌĆ▓ = ŽĆ(HŌĆ▓). Because T is critical, SŌĆ▓ ╠Ė= S, so ’¼üx
(P; Q) ŌłłS ŌłÆSŌĆ▓. Then, it is straightforward to check that any connection C between P and Q must
have used both B and C, but cannot have used the edge BC. Furthermore, C can use at most
one of the edges AB, AC. Indeed, if both AB, AC are used, they appear in the same path ╬│, but
replacing the two edges AB, AC with BC in ╬│ gives a connection between P and Q, but we know
that no such connection can use BC, a contradiction. Without loss of generality, suppose that C
does not use AB. Then, deleting AB from T yields a graph GŌĆ▓ with (P; Q) ŌłłGŌĆ▓, hence GŌĆ▓ is not
equivalent to H. However, it is clear that deleting BC from GŌĆ▓ yields HŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H. It follows, then,
that in the case in which e is contracted, we have GŌĆ▓ such that [G] > [GŌĆ▓] > [H], and hence [G]
does not cover [H].
For the case in which we delete e = ZC in T, the argument is similar. Deleting e in T yields
a graph HŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H with two edges AZ, ZB in series, which implies that T has a Y with vertices
A, B, C, Z, where Z is the middle vertex. It is easy to see that Z is not a boundary vertex. Then,
replacing AZ, ZB in HŌĆ▓ with the edge AB yields a graph HŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H. There exists a circular pair
(P; Q) ŌłłŽĆ(T) ŌłÆŽĆ(H), so we have a connection C between P and Q using the edge ZC. Then, C
also must use exactly one of AZ and BZ: wthout loss of generality, assume it is AZ. Contracting
BZ in T to yield the graph GŌĆ▓ leaves C intact, and deleting ZC from GŌĆ▓ gives HŌĆ▓ŌĆ▓ Ōł╝H. As before,
we thus have [G] > [GŌĆ▓] > [H], so we are done.
Theorem 3.2.4. EPn is graded by number of edges of critical representatives.
Proof. First, by Theorem 2.3.8, note that for any [G] ŌłłEPn, all critical representatives of [G] have
the same number of edges. Now, we need to show that if [G] covers [H], the number of edges in a
critical representative of [G] is one more than the same number for [H]. Let G Ōłł[G] be critical.
By Proposition 3.2.1, an edge of G may be contracted or deleted to yield a critical representative
H Ōłł[H], and it is clear that H has one fewer edge than G.
De’¼ünition 3.2.5. For all non-negative integers r, denote the set of elements of EPn of rank r by
EPn,r.
Let us pause to point out connections between EPn and two other posets, interpreting EPn as
the graded poset of lensless medial graphs with the covering relation arising from the legal breakings
of crossings that preserve lenslessness.
First, EPn bears a strong resemblance to the symmetric group Sn under the (strong) Bruhat
order, as follows. Associated to each permutation Žā ŌłłSn, there is a lensless wiring diagram, with
n wires connecting two parallel lines Ōäō1, Ōäō2, both with marked points 1, 2, . . . , n. For each i Ōłł[n],
15


d
d
c
c
a
a
b
b
f
e
f
e
Subcase A
Subcase B
Figure 9: Possible starting con’¼ügurations for two breakings using six medial boundary vertices.
there is a wire joining the point i ŌłłŌäō1 to Žā(i) ŌłłŌäō2. Then, the covering relation in Sn is exactly
that of EPn, except for the fact that each crossing can be broken in exactly one legal way.
Also, consider the poset Wn of equivalence classes of lensless wiring diagrams, not necessarily
full. Here, the equivalence relation here is generated by motions and resolution of lenses. The order
relation arises from breaking of crossings, in a similar way to EPn, but we are no longer concerned
about the creation of dividing lines. Wn can be proven to be graded in a similar way to the proof
of Theorem 3.2.4, and it is furthermore not di’¼ācult to check that EPn is in fact an interval in Wn.
3.3
Toward Eulerianness
In this section, we discuss the following conjecture, which we make more detailed in 3.3.3.
Conjecture 3.3.1. EPn is Eulerian.
We ’¼ürst prove that all closed intervals of length 2 in EPn have four elements, which reduces the
Eulerianness of EPn to lexicographic shellability.
Lemma 3.3.2. Suppose x ŌłłEPn,rŌłÆ1, z ŌłłEPn,r+1 with x < z. Then, there exist exactly two
y ŌłłEPn,r with x < y < z.
Proof. Take x and z to be (equivalence classes of) lensless medial graphs. By Theorem 3.2.4, x may
be obtained from z by a sequence of two legal resolutions of crossings. Suppose that x contains
the intersecting wires (labeled by their endpoints) ab and cd, whose intersection is broken (legally,
that is, without creating dividing lines) by instead taking wires ac, bd. There are two cases for the
next covering relation, from which x results: either one of ac, bd is involved, or a crossing between
two new wires is broken.
In the ’¼ürst case, suppose that a crossing between bd and ef is broken to give wires bf, de. Up
to equivalence under motions, we have one of the two con’¼ügurations in Figure 3.3.1, constituting
subcases A and B. We need to show that, in both cases, there is exactly one other sequence of two
legal breakings of crossings, starting from z, that gives x.
In subcase A, there are, at ’¼ürst glance, two possible other ways to get from the set of wires
{ab, cd, ef} to the set {ac, de, bf}: the ’¼ürst is through {ab, cf, de} and the second is through
{ae, cd, bf}. However, note that the latter case produces a lens, regardless of how the wires are
initially positioned to cross each other. Furthermore, assuming the legality of the sequence of break-
ings {ab, cd, ef} ŌåÆ{ac, bd, ef} ŌåÆ{ac, bf, de}, it is straightforward to check that {ab, cd, ef} ŌåÆ
{ab, cf, de} ŌåÆ{ae, cd, bf} is also a legal sequence of breakings. In subcase B, it is clear that the
only other way to get from z to x is through {ab, cf, de}, and indeed, it is again not di’¼ācult to
check that we get legal resolutions here.
Now, suppose instead that we have the legal sequence of resolutions
{ab, cd, ef, gh} ŌåÆ{ac, bd, ef, gh} ŌåÆ{ac, bd, eg, fh}
(3.3.1)
16


d
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
g
f
e
h
f
g
e
h
h
g
f
e
f
e
g
h
f
e
g
h
f
e
g
h
f
g
e
h
Figure 10: Possible starting con’¼ügurations for two breakings using eight medial boundary vertices.
The only other possible way to get from z to x is through {ab, cd, eg, fh}. Here, there are a number
of cases to check in order to verify legality of the sequence of two breakings involved. The essentially
di’¼Ćerent starting con’¼ügurations are enumerated in Figure 10. In each, one may check that
{ab, cd, ef, gh} ŌåÆ{ab, cd, eg, fh} ŌåÆ{ac, bd, eg, fh}
(3.3.2)
is a sequence of legal breakings of which does not create lenses, which will be a consequence of the
fact that the same is true of (3.3.1). The details are omitted.
Conjecture 3.3.3. EPn is lexicographically shellable, and hence Cohen-Macaulay, spherical, and
Eulerian.
We refer the reader to [BW] for de’¼ünitions. Indeed, if we have an L-labelling for EPn, it would
follow that the order complex Ōłå(EPn) is shellable and thus Cohen-Macaulay (see [BW, Theorem
3.4, Theorem 5.4(C)]). By Lemma 3.3.2, [B, Proposition 4.7.22] would apply, and we would conclude
that EPn is spherical and hence Eulerian.
Through [S+13], EPn has been veri’¼üed to be Eulerian for n Ōēż7, and the homology of EPn ŌłÆ
{b0,b1} agrees with that of a sphere of the correct dimension,
 n
2

ŌłÆ2, for n Ōēż4. On the other hand,
no L-labeling of EPn is known for n Ōēź4.
It is also worth mentioning the following conjecture concerning the poset Wn (de’¼üned at the
end of the previous section), which implies Conjecture 3.3.1.
Conjecture 3.3.4. The poset Wn Ōł¬{b0}, obtained by adjoining a minimal element to Wn, is Eule-
rian.
4
Enumerative Properties
We now investigate the enumerative properties of EPn, de’¼üned in ┬¦3. In the sections that follow,
all wiring diagrams are assumed to be lensless, and are considered up to motion-equivalence.
17


4.1
Total size Xn = |EPn|
In this section, we adapt methods of [C] to prove the ’¼ürst two enumerative results concerning
|EPn|, the number of equivalence classes of critical graphs (equivalently, full wiring diagrams) of
order n. There is a strong analogy between stabilized-interval free (SIF) permuations, as described
in [C], and our medial graphs, as follows. A permutation Žā may be represented as a 2-regular graph
╬Ż embedded in a disk with n boundary vertices. Then, Žā is SIF if and only if there are no dividing
lines, where here a dividing line is a line Ōäōbetween two boundary vertices such that no edge of ╬Ż
connects vertices on opposite sides of Ōäō.
To begin, we de’¼üne two operations on wiring diagrams in order to build large wiring diagrams
out of small, and vice versa. In both de’¼ünitions, ’¼üx a lensless (but not necessarily full) wiring
diagram M of order n, with boundary vertices labeled V1, V2, . . . , Vn.
De’¼ünition 4.1.1. Let w = XY be a wire of M. Construct the crossed expansion of M at
w, denoted Mw
+,c, as follows: add a boundary vertex Vn+1 to M, with associated medial boundary
vertices A, B, so that the medial boundary vertices A, B, X, Y appear in order around the circle.
Then, delete w from M and replace it with the crossing wires AX, BY to form Mw
+,c. Similarly,
de’¼üne the uncrossed expansion of M at w, denoted Mw
+,u, to be the lensless wiring digram
obtained by deleting w and replacing it with the non-crossing wires AY, BX.
De’¼ünition 4.1.2. Let Vi be a boundary vertex with associated medial boundary vertices A, B,
such that we have the wires AX, BY ŌłłM, and X ╠Ė= B, Y ╠Ė= A. De’¼üne the re’¼ünement of M at
Vi, denoted Mi
ŌłÆ, to be the lensless wiring diagram of order n ŌłÆ1 obtained by deleting the wires
AX, BY as well as the vertices A, B, Vi, and adding the wire XY .
Each construction is well-de’¼üned up to equivalence under motions by Theorem 2.4.3.
It is
clear that expanding M, then re’¼üning the result at the appropriate vertex, recovers M. Similarly,
re’¼üning M, then expanding the result after appropriately relabeling the vertices, recovers M if the
correct choice of crossed or uncrossed is made.
Lemma 4.1.3. Let M be a full wiring diagram, with boundary vertices V1, V2, . . . , Vn. Then:
(a) Mw
+,c is full for all wires w ŌłłM.
(b) Either Mw
+,u is full, or otherwise Mw
+,u has exactly one dividing line, which must have Vn+1
as one of its endpoints.
Proof. First, suppose for sake of contradiction that Mw
+,c has a dividing line Ōäō. If Ōäōis of the form
ViVn+1, then Ōäōmust exit the sector formed by the two crossed wires coming out of the medial
boundary vertices associated to Vn+1. If this is the case, we get an intersection between M+,c and
a wire, a contradiction. If instead, Ōäō= ViVj with i, j ╠Ė= n + 1, then Ōäōis a dividing line in M, also a
contradiction. We thus have (a). Similarly, we ’¼ünd that any dividing line of Mw
+,u must have Vn+1
as an endpoint. However, if ViVn+1, ViŌĆ▓Vn+1 are dividing lines, then ViViŌĆ▓ is as well, a contradiction,
so we have (b).
Lemma 4.1.4. Let M be a full wiring diagram, with boundary vertices V1, V2, . . . , Vn. Furthermore,
suppose Mn
ŌłÆexists and is not full. Then, Mn
ŌłÆhas a unique dividing line ViVj with 1 Ōēżi < j ŌēżnŌłÆ1
and j ŌłÆi maximal.
Proof. By assumption, Mn
ŌłÆhas a dividing line, so suppose for sake of contradiction that Ōäō1 =
Vi1Vj1, Ōäō2 = Vi2Vj2 are both dividing lines of MŌĆ▓ with d = j1 ŌłÆi1 = j2 ŌłÆi2 maximal. Without loss
of generality, assume i1 < i2 (and i1 < j1, i2 < j2). If j1 Ōēźi2, then Vi1Vj2 is also a dividing line
18


vn
vi
vj
M1
M2
Figure 11: M1 and M2, from M.
with j2 ŌłÆi1 > d, a contradiction. On the other hand, if j1 < i2, at least one of Ōäō1, Ōäō2 is a dividing
line for M, again a contradiction.
If M, i, j are as above, we now de’¼üne two wiring diagrams M1 and M2; see Figure 11 for an
example. First, let M1 be the result of restricting M to the wires associated to the vertices Vk,
for k Ōłł[i, j] Ōł¬{n}. Note that M1 is a wiring diagram of order j ŌłÆi + 1 with boundary vertices
Vi, Vi+1, . . . , Vj (and not Vn). Then, let M2 be the wiring diagram of order n ŌłÆ(j ŌłÆi + 1) obtained
by restricting M to the wires associated to the vertices Vk, for k /Ōłł[i, j] Ōł¬{n}.
Lemma 4.1.5. M1 and M2, as above, are full.
Proof. It is not di’¼ācult to check that any dividing line of M1 must also be a dividing line of M, a
contradiction. A dividing line ViŌĆ▓VjŌĆ▓ of M2 must also be a dividing line of Mn
ŌłÆ, but then jŌĆ▓ŌłÆiŌĆ▓ > jŌłÆi,
contradicting the maximality from Lemma 4.1.4.
We are now ready to prove the main theorem of this section.
Theorem 4.1.6. Put Xn = |EPn|, which here we take to be the number of full wiring diagrams of
order n. Then, X1 = 1, and for n Ōēź2,
Xn = 2(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 +
nŌłÆ2
X
k=2
(k ŌłÆ1)XkXnŌłÆk.
Proof. X1 = 1 is obvious. For n > 1, we would like to count the number of full wiring diagrams
M of order n, whose boundary vertices are labeled V1, V2, . . . , Vn, in clockwise order, with medial
boundary vertices Ai and Bi at each vertex, so that the order of points on the circle is Ai, Vi, Bi
in clockwise order. If AnBn is a wire, constructing the rest of M amounts to constructing a full
wiring diagram of order n ŌłÆ1, so there are XnŌłÆ1 such full wiring diagrams in this case.
Otherwise, consider the re’¼ünement Mn
ŌłÆ. All M for which Mn
ŌłÆis full can be obtained by ex-
panding at one of the n ŌłÆ1 wires of a full wiring diagram MŌĆ▓ of order n ŌłÆ1. By Lemma 4.1.3, the
expanded wiring diagram is full unless it has exactly one dividing line VkVn, and furthermore it is
easy to see that any such graphs is an expansion of a full wiring diagram of order n ŌłÆ1.
There are 2(n ŌłÆ1) ways to expand MŌĆ▓, and each expansion gives a di’¼Ćerent wiring diagram of
order n, for 2(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 total expanded wiring diagrams. However, by the previous paragraph,
the number of these which are not full is PnŌłÆ1
k=1 XkXnŌłÆk, as imposing a unique dividing line VkVn
forces us to construct two full wiring diagrams on either side, of orders k, n ŌłÆk respectively. Thus,
19


we have 2(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 ŌłÆPnŌłÆ1
k=1 XkXnŌłÆk full wiring diagrams of order n such that re’¼üning at Vn
gives another full wiring diagram.
It is left to count those M such that contracting at Vn leaves a non-full wiring diagram MŌĆ▓. By
Lemma 4.1.5, such an M gies us a pair of full wiring diagrams of orders i + j + 1, n ŌłÆ(i + j + 1),
where ViVj is as in Lemma 4.1.4. Conversely, given a pair of boundary vertices Vi, Vj ╠Ė= Vn of
M and full wiring diagrams of orders j ŌłÆi + 1, n ŌłÆ(j ŌłÆi + 1), we may reverse the construction
M 7ŌåÆ(M1, M2) to get a wiring diagram of order n: furthermore, it is not di’¼ācult to check that
this wiring diagram is full.
It follows that the number of such M is
X
1Ōēżi<jŌēżnŌłÆ1
XjŌłÆi+1XnŌłÆ(jŌłÆi+1) =
nŌłÆ2
X
k=1
kXkXnŌłÆk.
Summing our three cases together, we ’¼ünd
Xn = XnŌłÆ1 + 2(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ
nŌłÆ1
X
k=1
XkXnŌłÆk +
nŌłÆ2
X
k=1
kXkXnŌłÆk
= 2(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 +
nŌłÆ2
X
k=2
(k ŌłÆ1)XkXnŌłÆk,
using the fact that X1 = 1. The theorem is proven.
Remark 4.1.7. The sequence {Xn} is found in the Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences, see
[OEIS].
We also have an analogue of the other main result of [C].
Theorem 4.1.8. Let X(t) = PŌł×
n=0 Xntn be the generating function for the sequence {Xn}, where
we take X(0) = 0. Then, we have [tnŌłÆ1]X(t)n = n ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ3)!!.
Proof. Consider n boundary vertices on a circle, labeled V1, V2, . . . , Vn in clockwise order. Then,
label 2n medial boundary vertices W1, W2, . . . , W2n in clockwise order so that W2nŌłÆ1 and W2n lie
between Vn and V1 on the circle. Note that n ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ3)!! counts the number of wiring diagrams
so that the wire with endpoint W2n has second endpoint Wz, for some z odd. Call such wiring
diagrams 2n-odd. We need a bijection between 2n-odd wiring diagrams and lists of n full wiring
diagrams with sum of orders equal to n ŌłÆ1.
From here, the rest of the proof is nearly identical to the analogous result given on [C, p. 3], so
we give only a sketch. We will refer the reader often to [C] for more details.
Let W be a 2n-odd wiring diagram, with boundary vertices and medial boundary vertices labeled
as above. For i = 1, 2, . . . , n, let pi denote the pair of medial boundary vertices {W2iŌłÆ1, W2i}.
Consider the set of dividing lines of W. We ’¼ürst partition the pi in to minimal consecutive blocks
I = {pk, pk+1, . . . , pŌäō}, where indices are not taken modulo n, such that no wire has one endpoint
in some pi ŌłłI and the other in some pj /ŌłłI. Let ŽĆ denote this partition, with blocks ŽĆ1, ŽĆ2, . . . , ŽĆd.
We order the blocks in such a way that if pi ŌłłŽĆa, and pj ŌłłŽĆb, then, if i < j, we have a < b. Note
that, in particular, pn ŌłłŽĆd.
Now, for each block ŽĆa, write |ŽĆa| = xa. For a < d, ŽĆa may be further partitioned in to a
non-crossing partition of total size s, according to the dividing lines in the corresponding subgraph
of W. Each such partition corresponds to a Dyck path Pa of length 2xa, by a bijection described
20


in [C], and it is not di’¼ācult to check that, because ŽĆa was constructed to be a minimal connected
component, Pa only touches the x-axis at its endpoints.
On ŽĆd, we ’¼ürst perform the following operation similar to re’¼ünement, as in De’¼ünition 4.1.2.
Let the second endpoints of the wires w╬▒, w╬▓ coming from W2nŌłÆ1, W2n, respectively, be W╬▒, W╬▓,
respectively. Then, delete the wires w╬▒, w╬▓, and replace them with a single wire between W╬▒, W╬▓.
If, however, W2nŌłÆ1, W2n are connected by a single wire, simply delete this wire. In either case, the
resulting block ŽĆŌĆ▓
d now has order xd ŌłÆ1, and it, too, may be further partitioned in to a non-crossing
partition, corresponding to a Dyck path Pd of length 2xd ŌłÆ2. Unlike Pa, with a < d, Pd may touch
the x-axis more than twice.
We now cut the Dyck paths Pa in a similar way to that of [C]. For a < d, we cut Pa in the
following way: remove the last upstep u, thus breaking Pa in to a path Pa, followed by an upstep u,
and then followed by a descent Da. As for Pd, recall that, due to the bijection between non-crossing
partitions and Dyck paths, the upsteps in Pd correspond to to the elements pi ŌłłŽĆd. Let u0 denote
the upstep corresponding to the pi containing Wz, the second endpoint of the wire with endpoint
W2n. Then, break Pd in to the paths R, S, where R is the part of Pd appearing before u0, and S
consists of alls steps after those of R. In the case that z = 2k ŌłÆ1, note that xd = 1 and thus Pd is
empty. In this case, R, S are also taken to be empty.
Finally form the concatenated path D1uD2u ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę DkŌłÆ1uSRP1P2 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę PkŌłÆ1, as in [C]. There are
nŌłÆ1 upsteps in this path, which begins and ends on the x-axis. In between these nŌłÆ1 upsteps are
n (possibly empty) descents, which, using the bijection between non-crossing partitions and Dyck
paths, correspond to full sub-wiring diagrams of the pa. Therefore, we get the desired list of n full
wiring diagrams of total order n ŌłÆ1, and the process is reversible by an argument similar to that
of [C]. The details are left to the reader.
4.2
Asymptotic Behavior of Xn = |EPn|
In this section, we adapt methods from [SE] to prove:
Theorem 4.2.1. We have
lim
nŌåÆŌł×
Xn
(2n ŌłÆ1)!! = 1
ŌłÜe.
In other words, the density of full wiring diagrams in the set of all wiring diagrams is eŌłÆ1/2.
Lemma 4.2.2. For n Ōēź6, (2n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 < Xn < 2nXnŌłÆ1.
Proof. We proceed by strong induction on n: the inequality is easily veri’¼üed for n = 6, 7, 8 using
Theorem 4.1.6. Furthermore, note that Xn < 2nXnŌłÆ1 for n = 2, 3, 4, 5 as well. Now, assume n Ōēź9.
By Lemma 4.1.6, it is enough to show
XnŌłÆ1 <
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(j ŌłÆ1)XjXnŌłÆj < 2XnŌłÆ1.
(4.2.1)
We ’¼ürst show the left hand side of (4.2.1). Now, we have
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(j ŌłÆ1)XjXnŌłÆj > X2XnŌłÆ2 + (n ŌłÆ4)XnŌłÆ3X3 + (n ŌłÆ3)XnŌłÆ2X2
= 2(n ŌłÆ2)XnŌłÆ2 + 8(n ŌłÆ4)XnŌłÆ3
21


>
n ŌłÆ2
n ŌłÆ1 +
2(n ŌłÆ4)
(n ŌłÆ2)(n ŌłÆ1)

XnŌłÆ1
> XnŌłÆ1,
where we have applied the inductive hypothesis.
It remains to prove the right hand side of (4.2.1). First, suppose that n is odd, with n =
2k ŌłÆ1, k Ōēź4. Let Qi = Xi/XiŌłÆ1 for each i; we know that Qi > 2i ŌłÆ1 for all i Ōēź5. Then, we have
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(j ŌłÆ1)XjXnŌłÆj = (2k ŌłÆ3)
kŌłÆ1
X
j=2
XjX2kŌłÆ1ŌłÆj
= (2k ŌłÆ3)XnŌłÆ1
kŌłÆ1
X
j=2
Xj
Q2kŌłÆ2Q2kŌłÆ3 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę Q2kŌłÆj
< (2k ŌłÆ3)XnŌłÆ1
kŌłÆ1
X
j=2
Xj
(4k ŌłÆ5)(4k ŌłÆ7) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (4k ŌłÆ2j ŌłÆ1)
However, we claim that the terms in the sum are strictly decreasing. This amounts to the inequality
(4kŌłÆ2jŌłÆ1)XjŌłÆ1 > Xj for 3 Ōēżj ŌēżkŌłÆ1, which follows by the inductive hypothesis as 4kŌłÆ2jŌłÆ1 > 2j.
Thus,
(2k ŌłÆ3)XnŌłÆ1
kŌłÆ1
X
j=2
Xj
(4k ŌłÆ5)(4k ŌłÆ7) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (4k ŌłÆ2j ŌłÆ1)
< (2k ŌłÆ3)XnŌłÆ1

X2
4k ŌłÆ5 +
(k ŌłÆ3)X3
(4k ŌłÆ5)(4k ŌłÆ7)

= XnŌłÆ1
4k ŌłÆ6
4k ŌłÆ5 + (4k ŌłÆ12)(4k ŌłÆ6)
(4k ŌłÆ5)(4k ŌłÆ7)

< 2XnŌłÆ1,
where we substitute X2 = 2, X3 = 8. The case in which n is even may be handled similarly, and
the induction is complete.
Corollary 4.2.3. There exists a limit
C = lim
nŌåÆŌł×
Xn
(2n ŌłÆ1)!!,
and furthermore, C > 0.
Proof. The sequence Xn/(2n ŌłÆ1)!! is bounded above by 1 and is eventually strictly increasing
by Lemma 4.2.2, so the limit C exists. Furthermore, C > 0 because Xn/(2n ŌłÆ1)!! is eventually
increasing.
To prove Theorem 4.2.1, we will estimate the number of non-full wiring graphs of order n. Let
Dn denote the number of wiring diagrams formed in the following way: for 1 Ōēżj Ōēżn ŌłÆ2, choose
j pairs of adjacent boundary vertices, and for each pair, connect the two medial boundary vertices
between them. Then, with the remaining 2n ŌłÆ2j vertices, form a full wiring diagram of order
n ŌłÆj, which in particular has no dividing lines whose endpoints are adjacent boundary vertices. It
is clear that all such diagrams are non-full.
22


For completeness, we will also include in our count the wiring diagram where all pairs of adjacent
boundary vertices give dividing lines, but because we are interested in the asymptotic behavior of
Dn, this addition will be of no consequence. It is easily seen that
Dn = 1 +
nŌłÆ2
X
j=1
n
j

XnŌłÆj.
Now, let En be the number of non-full wiring diagrams not constructed above. Consider the
following construction: choose an ordered pair of distinct, non-adjacent boundary vertices on our
boundary circle. Then, on each side of the directed segment, construct any wiring diagram. This
construction yields
Yn = n
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(2n ŌłÆ2j ŌłÆ1)!!(2j ŌłÆ1)!!
total (not necessarily distinct) wiring diagrams, which clearly overcounts En.
We now state two lemmas:
Lemma 4.2.4. Dn/Xn ŌåÆŌłÜe ŌłÆ1 as n ŌåÆŌł×
Lemma 4.2.5. Yn/Xn ŌåÆ0 as n ŌåÆŌł×.
From here, we will be able to establish the desired asymptotic.
Proof of Theorem 4.2.1. Xn, Dn, and En together count the total number of wiring diagrams,
which is equal to (2n ŌłÆ1)!!. Thus,
(2n ŌłÆ1)!!
Xn
= Xn + Dn + En
Xn
ŌåÆ1 + (ŌłÜe ŌłÆ1) + 0 = e1/2,
assuming Lemmas 4.2.4 and 4.2.5 (we have Yn/Xn ŌåÆ0, so En/Xn ŌåÆ0 as well), so the desired
conclusion is immediate from taking the reciprocal.
Thus, it remains to prove Lemmas 4.2.4 and 4.2.5, which we defer to Appendix A.
Let us summarize now the results of the last two sections:
Theorem 4.2.6.
(a) X1 = 1 and
Xn = 2(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1 +
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(j ŌłÆ1)XjXnŌłÆj.
(b) [tnŌłÆ1]X(t)n = n ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ3)!!, where X(t) is the generating function for the sequence {Xi}.
(c) Xn/(2n ŌłÆ1)!! ŌåÆeŌłÆ1/2 to Ōł×.
To conclude this section, we propose the following generalization of Theorem 4.2.6:
Conjecture 4.2.7. Let ╬╗ be a positive integer. Consider the sequence {Xn,╬╗} de’¼üned by X1,╬╗ = 1,
and
Xn = ╬╗(n ŌłÆ1)XnŌłÆ1,╬╗ +
nŌłÆ2
X
k=2
(j ŌłÆ1)Xj,╬╗XnŌłÆk,╬╗.
23


Then, let X╬╗(t) be the generating function for the sequence {Xn,╬╗}. Then,
[tnŌłÆ1]X╬╗(t)n = n ┬Ę (1/╬╗)n
and
lim
nŌåÆŌł×
X╬╗,n
(1/╬╗)n
=
1
nŌłÜe,
where (a)n = a(a + 1) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (a + (n ŌłÆ1)).
A proof exhibiting and exploiting a combinatorial interpretation for the sequence {Xn,╬╗} would
be most desirable, as we have done for ╬╗ = 2. However, no such interpretation is known for ╬╗ > 2.
The case ╬╗ = 1 is handled in [C] and [ST, ┬¦3], though the latter does not use the interpretation of
Xn,1 as SIF permutations of [n] to obtain the asymptotic.
Interestingly, if we de’¼üne Xn,ŌłÆ1 analogously, we get Xn,ŌłÆ1 = (ŌłÆ1)n+1Cn, where Cn denotes the
n-th Catalan number, see [OEIS].
4.3
Rank sizes |EPn,r|
Proposition 4.3.1. For non-negative c Ōēżn ŌłÆ2, we have |EPn,(n
2)ŌłÆc| =
 nŌłÆ1+c
c

. Furthermore,
|EPn,(n
2)ŌłÆ(nŌłÆ1)| =
 2nŌłÆ2
nŌłÆ1

ŌłÆn.
Proof. For convenience, put N =
 n
2

. We claim that for c Ōēżn ŌłÆ2, any wiring diagram of order n
with N ŌłÆc crossings is necessarily full. Suppose instead that we have a dividing line, dividing our
circle in to two wiring diagrams of orders with j, n ŌłÆj. Then, there are at most
j
2

+
n ŌłÆj
2

Ōēż
n ŌłÆ1
2

= N ŌłÆ(n ŌłÆ1)
crossings, so if c Ōēżn ŌłÆ2 we cannot have a dividing line.
Thus, for c Ōēżn ŌłÆ2, it su’¼āces to compute the number of circular wiring diagrams with N ŌłÆc
crossings. By [R, (1)], this number is the coe’¼ācient of the qNŌłÆc term of the polynomial
Tn(q) = (1 ŌłÆq)ŌłÆn
n
X
j=0
(ŌłÆ1)j
 2n
n ŌłÆj

ŌłÆ

2n
n ŌłÆj ŌłÆ1

q(j+1
2 ),
(4.3.1)
which, as noted in [R, p. 218], is
 n+cŌłÆ1
nŌłÆ1

for c Ōēżn ŌłÆ1. This immediately gives the desired result
for c Ōēżn ŌłÆ2.
For c = n ŌłÆ1, we have, by the above,
 2nŌłÆ2
nŌłÆ1

wiring diagrams with N ŌłÆc crossings; we need
to count the number of such wiring diagrams that contain a dividing line. However, note that if
our dividing line separates the circle in to wiring diagrams of orders j, n ŌłÆj for 1 < j Ōēżn/2, there
are at most
 nŌłÆ2
2

+ 1 crossings (using a similar argument to that in the ’¼ürst paragraph), which is
strictly less than N ŌłÆ(n ŌłÆ1), so we must have j = 1.
Furthermore, by the ’¼ürst paragraph, if j = 1, we need exactly
 nŌłÆ1
2

crossings. Thus, a non-full
wiring diagram with N ŌłÆ(n ŌłÆ1) crossings must connect two adjacent medial boundary vertices
between two boundary vertices, and connect all of the other medial boundary vertices in such
the unique way such that we have the maximal possible number of crossings between the n ŌłÆ1
wires. There are clearly n such non-full wiring diagrams, giving |EPn,NŌłÆ(nŌłÆ1)| =
 2nŌłÆ2
nŌłÆ1

ŌłÆn, as
desired.
24


1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
Figure 12: [1][23][4][579][6][8] breaks the disk in to four wiring regions.
Proposition 4.3.1 gives an exact formula for |EPn,r| for r large, but no general formula is known
for general r. For ’¼üxed r and n su’¼āciently large, one will only have ’¼ünitely many cases to enumerate
for possible con’¼ügurations of an electrical network, but the casework becomes cumbersome quickly.
However, the M┬©obius Inversion Formula gives us an expression for the generating function for the
number of full wiring diagrams of order n, counted by number of crossings.
Let NCn be the (graded) poset of non-crossing partitions on n, ordered by re’¼ünement. By [BS,
Proposition 2.3], we have ┬Ą(b0,b1) = (ŌłÆ1)nŌłÆ1CnŌłÆ1 in NCn, and furthermore, for any ŽĆ ŌłłNCn, the
interval (b0, ŽĆ) is isomorphic to a product of the partition lattices NCk, where k ranges over the
block sizes of ŽĆ. Given ŽĆ ŌłłNCn, ŽĆ may be represented as a set of dividing lines in a disk D with
boundary vertices V1, V2, . . . , Vn as follows: draw the dividing line ViVj if i, j are in the same block
of ŽĆ. Furthermore, the set of dividing lines for a wiring diagram yields a non-crossing partition [n]
in the same way.
Let kŽĆ denote the number of blocks in ŽĆ. It is clear that drawing these dividing lines of ŽĆ
breaks D in to n + 1 ŌłÆkŽĆ regions in which wires can be drawn (see Figure 12 for an example). Let
aŽĆ,1, . . . , aŽĆ,n+1ŌłÆkŽĆ denote the numbers of boundary vertices drawn in these regions. Finally, let
Xn(q) be the rank-generating function for EPn, that is, the polynomial in q such that the coe’¼ācient
of qr is |EPn,r|. Then, by M┬©obius Inversion, we get:
Proposition 4.3.2.
Xn(q) =
X
ŽĆŌłłNCn
’Ż½
’ŻŁ(ŌłÆ1)nŌłÆkŽĆ
kŽĆ
Y
i=1
CŽĆiŌłÆ1
n+1ŌłÆkŽĆ
Y
j=1
Taj(q)
’ŻČ
’ŻĖ,
(4.3.2)
where kŽĆ, aŽĆ,j are as before, ŽĆi denotes the number of elements in the i-th block of ŽĆ, and the
polynomial Tm(q) is as in (4.3.1).
Let us also mention a formula for the bivariate generating function P
n Xn(q)tn, whose qrtn-
coe’¼ācient is |EPn,r|. Recalling, from [OEIS], the formula
X
n
Xntn = t/F Ō¤©ŌłÆ1Ō¤®(t),
where F(t) = t P
n(2n ŌłÆ1)!!tn is a shift of the generating function for the sequence of double
factorials and F Ō¤©ŌłÆ1Ō¤®denotes its formal inverse.
We may then replace F(t) with the bivariate
25


generating function F(t, q) = t P
n,r Tn(q)tn, and obtain
X
n
Xn(q)tn = t/F Ō¤©ŌłÆ1Ō¤®(t, q),
where here the inverse is taken with respect to t only.
To conclude this section, we cannot resist making the following conjecture:
Conjecture 4.3.3. EPn is rank-unimodal.
In support of Conjecture 4.3.3, let us list the rank sizes of EPn below, for small values of n.
Rank Sizes
n
Rank Size
1
1
2
1, 1
3
1, 3, 3, 1
4
1, 6, 14, 16, 10, 4, 1
5
1, 10, 40, 85, 110, 97, 65, 35, 15, 5, 1,
6
1, 15, 90, 295, 609, 873, 948, 840, 636, 421, 246, 126, 56, 21, 6, 1
7
1, 21, 175, 805, 2366, 4872, 7567, 9459,
10031, 9359, 7861, 6027, 4249, 2765, 1661, 917, 462, 210, 84, 28, 7, 1
8
1, 28, 308, 1876, 7350, 20272, 42090, 69620, 96334, 115980, 125044, 123176, 112380, 95836,
76868, 58220, 41734, 28344, 18236, 11096, 6364, 3424, 1716, 792, 330, 120, 36, 8, 1
5
Acknowledgments
This work was undertaken at the REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) program
at the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, supported by NSF grants DMS-1067183 and DMS-
1148634. The authors thank Joel Lewis, Gregg Musiker, Pavlo Pylyavskyy, and Dennis Stanton for
their leadership of the program, and are especially grateful to Joel Lewis and Pavlo Pylyavskyy for
introducing them to this problem and for their invaluable insight and encouragement. The authors
also thank to Thomas McConville for many helpful discussions. Finally, the authors thank Vic
Reiner, Jonathan Schneider, and Dennis Stanton for suggesting references, and Damien Jiang and
Ben Zinberg for formatting suggestions.
A
Proofs of Lemmas 4.2.4 and 4.2.5
Recall the de’¼ünitions of Dn, En, Xn from ┬¦4.2. We will prove Lemmas 4.2.4 and 4.2.5, that
Dn/Xn ŌåÆŌłÜe ŌłÆ1 and En/Xn ŌåÆ0, respectively.
Proof of Lemma 4.2.4. We may as well consider Dn ŌłÆ1 = PnŌłÆ2
j=1
 n
j

XnŌłÆj.
Using the notation
Qi = Xi/XiŌłÆ1, as in the proof of Lemma 4.2.2, we have
PnŌłÆ2
j=1
 n
j

XnŌłÆj
Xn
=
nŌłÆ2
X
j=1
1
j! ┬Ę n(n ŌłÆ1) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (n ŌłÆj + 1)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+1
=
nŌłÆ2
X
j=1
1
2jj! ┬Ę 2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 2)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+1
26


=
nŌłÆ2
X
j=1
1
2jj! +
nŌłÆ2
X
jŌłÆ1
1
2jj!
2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 2)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+1
ŌłÆ1

.
As n ŌåÆŌł×, ’¼ürst summand above converges to ŌłÜeŌłÆ1, so it is left to check that the second summand
converges to zero.
Note that, by Lemma 4.2.2,
2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 1)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+2
> 1.
Now,
0 <
nŌłÆ2
X
j=1
1
2jj!
2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 2)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+1
ŌłÆ1

<
nŌłÆ5
X
j=1
1
2jj!
2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 2)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+1
ŌłÆ1

+ Kn

1
2nŌłÆ4(n ŌłÆ4)! +
1
2nŌłÆ3(n ŌłÆ3)! +
1
2nŌłÆ2(n ŌłÆ2)!

,
for some positive constant K, because
2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 2)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+1
< 2n ┬Ę 2n ŌłÆ2
Qn
┬Ę 2n ŌłÆ4
QnŌłÆ1
┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę 2n ŌłÆ2j + 2
QnŌłÆj+2
┬Ę
1
QnŌłÆj+1
< Kn,
as by Lemma 4.2.2, all but a ’¼üxed number of the fractions are less than 1, and those which are not
are constant. It is then easy to see that the term
Kn

1
2nŌłÆ4(n ŌłÆ4)! +
1
2nŌłÆ3(n ŌłÆ3)! +
1
2nŌłÆ2(n ŌłÆ2)!

goes to zero as n ŌåÆŌł×. Now, applying Lemma 4.2.2 again (noting that the indices are all at least
6),
nŌłÆ5
X
j=1
1
2jj!
2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 2)
QnQnŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę QnŌłÆj+1
ŌłÆ1

<
nŌłÆ5
X
j=1
1
2jj!

2n(2n ŌłÆ2) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 2)
(2n ŌłÆ1)(2n ŌłÆ3) ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę (2n ŌłÆ2j + 1) ŌłÆ1

<
nŌłÆ5
X
j=1
1
2jj! ┬Ę

2n
2n ŌłÆ2j + 1 ŌłÆ1

<
nŌłÆ5
X
j=1
1
2jj! ┬Ę
2j ŌłÆ1
2n ŌłÆ2j + 1
27


<
nŌłÆ5
X
j=1
1
2jŌłÆ1(j ŌłÆ1)! ┬Ę
1
2n ŌłÆ2j + 1.
It is enough to show that the above sum goes to zero as n ŌåÆŌł×. To do this, we split it in to two
sums:
nŌłÆ5
X
j=1
1
2jŌłÆ1(j ŌłÆ1)! ┬Ę
1
2n ŌłÆ2j + 1
=
X
1Ōēżj<n/2
1
2jŌłÆ1(j ŌłÆ1)! ┬Ę
1
2n ŌłÆ2j + 1 +
X
n/2ŌēżjŌēżnŌłÆ5
1
2jŌłÆ1(j ŌłÆ1)! ┬Ę
1
2n ŌłÆ2j + 1
<
X
1Ōēżj<n/2
1
2jŌłÆ1(j ŌłÆ1)! ┬Ę 1
n +
X
n/2ŌēżjŌēżnŌłÆ5
1
2jŌłÆ1(j ŌłÆ1)!
<
ŌłÜe
n +
X
n/2ŌēżjŌēżnŌłÆ5
1
2jŌłÆ1(j ŌłÆ1)!.
The ’¼ürst summand clearly tends to zero as n ŌåÆŌł×. The rest of the sum must tend to zero as well,
as it is the tail of a convergent sum, so the proof is complete.
Proof of Lemma 4.2.5. First, note that by Corollary 4.2.3, Xi is within a (positive) constant factor
of (2i ŌłÆ1)!! for each i. Thus, to prove that En/Xn ŌåÆ0, we may as well prove that
n
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(2j ŌłÆ1)!!(2n ŌłÆ2j ŌłÆ1)!!
(2n ŌłÆ1)!!
ŌåÆ0.
It is straightforward to check that the largest terms of the sum are when j = 2, n ŌłÆ2, and these
terms are of inverse quadratic order. Thus,
n
nŌłÆ2
X
j=2
(2j ŌłÆ1)!!(2n ŌłÆ2j ŌłÆ1)!!
(2n ŌłÆ1)!!
< nO(nŌłÆ2) = O(nŌłÆ1),
and the conclusion follows.
References
[B]
A. Bj┬©orner, et al., Oriented Matroids, Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its Applications, Cambridge
University Press (1999).
[BW] A. Bj┬©orner, M. Wachs, Bruhat order of Coxeter groups and shellability, Adv. Math. 43 (1982), 87-100.
[BS] A. Blass, B.E. Sagan, M┬©obius Functions of Lattices, Adv. Math. 127 (1997), 94-123.
[C]
D. Callan, Counting Stabilized-Interval-Free Permutations, J. Int. Seq. 7 (2004), 04.1.8.
[CIM] E.B. Curtis, D. Ingerman, and J.A. Morrow, Circular planar graphs and resistor networks, Lin. Alg.
Appl. 283 (1998), 115-150.
[OEIS] OEIS Foundation Inc. (2011), The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences, http://oeis.org/
A111088.
[R]
J. Riordan, The distribution of crossings of chords joining pairs of 2n points on a circle, Math. Comp.
29 (1975), 215-222.
[S+13] W. A. Stein et al., Sage Mathematics Software (Version 5.9), The Sage Development Team (2013).
28


[ST] P. Salvatore and R. Tauroso, The Operad Lie is Free, J. Pure Appl. Alg. 213 (2009), 224-230.
[SE] P.J. Stein and C.J. Everett, On a Class of Linked Diagrams - II. Asymptotics, Disc. Math. 21 (1978),
309-318.
[dVGV] Y.C. de Verdi`ere, I. Gitler, and D. Vertigan, R┬┤eseaux ┬┤electriques planaires II, Comment. Math.
Helv. 71 (1996), 144-167.
29
