Triangulations of Surfaces
Allen Hatcher
This is a slightly revised and expanded version of a paper published in 1991
with a very similar title.
This paper uses an elementary surgery technique to give a simple topological proof of a
theorem of Harer which says that the simplicial complex having as its top-dimensional
simplices the isotopy classes of triangulations of a compact surface with a ﬁxed set
of vertices is contractible, except in a few special cases when it is homeomorphic to
a sphere. (Triangulations here are allowed to have triangles with coinciding vertices
or edges.) The proof yields mild generalizations of Harer’s theorem, allowing more
general vertex sets, as well as extending to a larger complex whose simplices corre-
spond to curve systems consisting of circles as well as arcs. As a corollary we deduce
the well-known classical fact that any two isotopy classes of triangulations of a com-
pact surface with a ﬁxed set of vertices are related by a ﬁnite sequence of elementary
moves in which only one edge changes at a time.
Let S be a compact connected surface, possibly with boundary. For our ﬁxed set of
vertices we choose any nonempty ﬁnite subset V = {v1, · · · , vn} of S . By an essential
arc in (S, V) we mean an arc α embedded in S so as to meet ∂S ∪V only in the
endpoints of α, which lie in V and are permitted to coincide, with the condition that
α does not separate S into two components, one of which is a disk meeting V only in
the endpoints of α. By an essential circle in (S, V) we mean an embedded circle in S
disjoint from ∂S ∪V which does not separate S into two components, one of which
is either a disk meeting V in at most one point or an annulus disjoint from V .
A collection {α0, · · · , αk} of essential circles and arcs in S which are disjoint except
perhaps for the endpoints of the arcs, and such that no two αi ’s are ambient isotopic
ﬁxing V , we call a curve system. The ambient isotopy classes (rel V ) of curve systems
{α0, · · · , αk} form the k-simplices [α0, · · · , αk] of a simplicial complex C = C(S, V),
the faces of [α0, · · · , αk] being obtained by passing to subcollections of {α0, · · · , αk}.
Let A = A(S, V) be the subcomplex consisting of simplices [α0, · · · , αk] with each
αi an arc. We will exclude without further mention the trivial cases when A(S, V) or
C(S, V) is empty.
1


Theorem. (a) The complex A(S, V) is contractible except when S is a disk with V
contained in ∂S or an annulus with V contained in one component of ∂S . In these
exceptional cases A(S, V) is homeomorphic to a sphere.
(b) If V contains at least one point in the interior of S , then C(S, V) is contractible.
When V is contained in ∂S , the complex A(S, V) is the complex denoted AZ(∆) in
[H1], whose contractibility is the principal technical result (Theorem 1.5) in that paper,
proved using the heavier machinery of Thurston’s theory of projective lamination
spaces. An intermediate generalization is Theorem 1.1(a) in [H2]. See also [B-E]. The
exceptional situation when A(S, V) is a sphere is Theorem 1.1(b) of [H2].
Another special case of interest is when ∂S = ∅. If we then form the compact surface
S′ by puncturing S at the points of V , then C(S, V) can be identiﬁed with the sub-
set of the projective lamination space of S′ consisting of laminations with all leaves
compact. Namely, to a point of a simplex [α0, · · · , αk] in C(S, V) with barycentric
coordinates (t0, · · · , tk), associate the measured lamination α0 ∪· · · ∪αk with ti
the measure of αi . (The topology on C(S, V) as a simplicial complex is generally
ﬁner than the subspace topology on this subset of the projective lamination space,
however.)
In case V meets each component of ∂S , the maximal simplices of A(S, V) corre-
spond to collections of arcs decomposing S into triangles with the ﬁxed vertex set
V , “triangulations" in the generalized sense that vertices of a triangle can coincide, as
can a pair of edges, and two triangles can intersect in more than a vertex or edge. In
the general case that some components of ∂S are disjoint from V , then maximal sim-
plices of A(S, V) decompose S also into punctured monogons, the punctures being
these components of ∂S . For simplicity we will call these more general decomposi-
tions “triangulations" of (S, V) also. Figure 1 shows two elementary moves in which
triangulations are modiﬁed, nonisotopically, by changing one edge in a quadrilateral
or punctured digon.
Figure 1
2


Corollary. Any two isotopy classes of triangulations of (S, V) are related by a ﬁnite
sequence of elementary moves.
When V meets each component of ∂S a much stronger result can be found in [H2],
where a contractible cell complex is constructed whose vertices are the triangulations
of (S, V) and whose edges are the elementary moves between triangulations. The
2-cells of this complex give certain basic relations among elementary moves, etc.
Proof of the Corollary: Triangulations of (S, V) correspond to maximal simplices
of A, which all have the same dimension by Euler characteristic considerations.
Codimension-one faces of these simplices are obtained by deleting one edge from a tri-
angulation. In the two cases of elementary moves, the codimension one face belongs
to exactly two maximal simplices. The only other possibility is that the deleted edge
occurs twice in the same triangle, and the codimension one face belongs to only one
maximal simplex. The Corollary thus translates into the statement that any two maxi-
mal simplices in A can be joined by a path passing only through (open) codimension-
one faces, except in the cases when A has dimension zero and more than one point;
using the Theorem one sees that this happens only when (S, V) is a quadrilateral or
a punctured digon, exactly the two cases shown in Figure 1, when A consists of two
points related by an elementary move.
The basic fact we need is that A is connected whenever it has dimension greater
than zero. This follows from the theorem. By this fact, any two maximal simplices
of A can be joined by some polygonal path in A, and it remains to push this path
oﬀall simplices of codimension greater than one. This is done by induction on the
minimum dimension of the simplices encountered along the path, and will be possible
provided the links of simplices of codimension greater than one are connected. But
the link of a simplex [α0, · · · , αk] can be identiﬁed with A(S′, V ′) where (S′, V ′) is
(S, V) cut open along the arcs αi . The surface S′ might not be connected, but this
is not a problem since A(S, V) can be deﬁned just as well for disconnected surfaces,
where it is simply the join of the complexes A for the separate components. Since
[α0, · · · , αk] has codimension at least two, A(S′, V ′) has dimension at least one,
hence is connected.
⊔⊓
Another elementary proof of this corollary can be found in [M], p. 36.
3


Proof of the Theorem: For part (a), ﬁrst assume that V has at most one point in each
component of ∂S . Let β be an essential arc in (S, V). We will construct a deformation
retraction (in fact a ﬂow which is linear on simplices) of A onto the star of the vertex
[β]. This star consists of the simplices [α0, · · · , αk] in A coming from curve systems
α0 ∪· · · ∪αk disjoint from β. (One αi can be isotopic to β.) Since stars are always
contractible, part (a) of the theorem will follow in this special case.
Let [α0, · · · , αk] be a simplex of A. We may assume α0 ∪· · ·∪αk has been isotoped
to intersect β minimally, so there is no disk D ⊂S with ∂D consisting of an arc in
β and an arc in an αi , ∂D ̸= αi ∪β, and with the interior of D disjoint from V . We
will use the well-known fact that any two such minimal positions for α0 ∪· · · ∪αk
are isotopic through a family of minimum position curve systems. (This is not hard
to prove: Take an isotopy F :
`
αi × I →S between minimum position curve systems,
perturb F to be transverse to β, then gradually simplify F−1(β), cancelling critical
points of the projection F−1(β) →I .)
Let P =
P
tiαi be a point in the simplex [α0, · · · , αk], expressed in terms of barycen-
tric coordinates ti with
P
ti = 1. We can think of P as a weighted sum of the curves
αi , and we can interpret this weighted sum geometrically by replacing each αi with
a family of nearby parallel curves of total thickness ti (with the endpoints of arcs
within a family pinched together at V ). For convenience, pinch all the families of
parallel curves in P into a single family where they cross β, with total thickness θ ,
as shown in Figure 2(a).
(a)
(b)
Figure 2
Now for t ∈[0, 1] let Pt be obtained from P by ﬁrst cutting part of the way through
the thickness θ band crossing β, starting from a chosen end of β and cutting in to
4


a thickness tθ , then redirecting the two ends of the resulting cut band to the given
end of β, as indicated in Figure 2(b). The curves of Pt will all be essential, except for
∂-parallel arcs produced as in Figure 3. These we simply discard from Pt ; note that
not all of Pt is discarded since we assume V has at most one point in each component
of ∂S .
Figure 3
In terms of the curve system c1 = α0 ∪· · · ∪αk this procedure can be described as
follows. Let x1, · · · , xm be the points of intersection of β with c1 , ordered as they
are ordered along β starting at the chosen end of β. Sliding the intersection point x1
to the end of β converts c1 to a new curve system c2 (after discarding arcs that are
parallel or ∂-parallel) meeting β in x2, · · · , xm . The union c1 ∪c2 is a curve system
deﬁning a simplex σ1 containing [α0, · · · , αk] as a face. Initial segments of the paths
Pt move linearly along ﬁbers of a linear projection of σ1 onto the face corresponding
to c2 , stopping when they reach this face. Now repeat the process, sliding x2 to the
end of β to convert c2 to c3 , etc., until all the xi ’s have been eliminated. We see
from this that the paths Pt starting at points of [α0, · · · , αk] ﬂow linearly across a
ﬁnite sequence of simplices σ1, · · · , σm . So the ﬂow is continuous on [α0, · · · , αk].
Furthermore, it is clear that this ﬂow restricted to a face of [α0, · · · , αk] is the ﬂow
associated to that face. Hence the ﬂow is continuous on all of A (it is the identity on
the star of [β]), deﬁning a deformation retraction of A onto the star of [β]. This
ﬁnishes the proof of (a) in the special case that V has at most one vertex in each
component of ∂V .
For the general case of (a) we will use the following result, whose proof does not
involve the surgery technique:
Proposition. If V ′ is obtained from V by adding a new vertex in a component of ∂S
that already contains at least one vertex of V , then A(S, V ′) is homeomorphic to the
suspension of A(S, V).
5


Proof: Let v′ be the new vertex, adjacent to a vertex v of V in a component of ∂V .
Let β be the ∂-parallel arc in S joining v′ to the next vertex of V ′ on the other side
of v (which might be v′ again), and let β′ be deﬁned similarly by interchanging the
roles of v and v′ ; see Figure 4(a). Let X be the subcomplex of A(S, V ′) consisting
of arc systems not containing β or β′ . We can obtain A(S, V ′) from X by attaching
the stars St(β) and St(β′) of the vertices β and β′ along the links of these vertices,
these links being subcomplexes of X .
(a)
(b)
Figure 4
The suspension ΣA(S, V) can be parametrized as the quotient of A(S, V) × [−1, 1]
with each of A(S, V) × {−1} and A(S, V) × {1} collapsed to points.
There is an
embedding f : X →ΣA(S, V) sending a point x ∈X , viewed as a weighted arc system,
to the point f(x) = (x, (θ(x) −θ′(x))/2) where x is obtained from x by collapsing
the segment of ∂S joining v and v′ to a point, and θ(x) and θ′(x) are the total
weights of the arcs of x at v and v′, respectively. These weights lie in the interval
[0, 1] so (θ(x)−θ′(x))/2 is in [−1/2, 1/2]. For ﬁxed x the values of (θ(x)−θ′(x))/2
range over a symmetric interval about 0 whose length equals θ(x) + θ′(x). This
varies continuously with x and can be 0 if V ′ contains other vertices besides v and
v′. The map X →A(S, V), x ֏ x , is surjective, so the complement of f(X) in
ΣA(S, V) consists of the open cones on the links of β and β′ , so the closures of
these two open cones are the stars of β and β′ . Thus we have decomposed both
A(S, V ′) and ΣA(S, V) into the same three pieces, intersecting in the same way, so
they are homeomorphic, in fact piecewise linearly homeomorphic.
⊔⊓
The general case of (a) now follows by an inductive procedure, the inductive step being
given by the Proposition. In most cases the induction starts with one of the special
cases considered earlier when V has at most one point in each component of ∂S , so
6


A(S, V) is contractible. The exceptional cases where A(S, V) is a sphere arise from
starting the induction with the two cases that A(S, V) is the sphere S0 , shown in
Figure 1, the cases that S is a disk and V consists of four points in its boundary, or
S is an annulus and V consists of two points in one of its boundary components.
For (b) the same technique used to prove the special case of (a) can be applied provided
that we choose for β an essential arc with both endpoints at a point of V in the interior
of S .
⊔⊓
References
[B-E] B. H. Bowditch and D. B. A. Epstein, Natural triangulations associated to a surface,
Topology 27 (1988), 91-117.
[H1] J. L. Harer, Stability of the homology of the mapping class groups of orientable
surfaces, Annals of Math. 121 (l985), 215-249.
[H2] J. L. Harer, The virtual cohomological dimension of the mapping class group of
an orientable surface, Invent. math. 84 (1986), 157-176.
[M] L. Mosher, Tiling the projective foliation space of a punctured surface, Trans. A.
M. S. 306 (1988), 1-70.
7
