                           Econometrica, Vol. 88, No. 2 (March, 2020), 569–594

       THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION IN SOCIAL NETWORKS

                                              ITAI ARIELI
        Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology

                                         YAKOV BABICHENKO
        Faculty of Industrial Engineering and Management, Technion–Israel Institute of Technology

                                           RON PERETZ
                              Department of Economics, Bar Ilan University

                                      H. PEYTON YOUNG
         Department of Mathematics, London School of Economics and Nufﬁeld College, Oxford


              New ways of doing things often get started through the actions of a few innovators,
           then diffuse rapidly as more and more people come into contact with prior adopters
           in their social network. Much of the literature focuses on the speed of diffusion as a
           function of the network topology. In practice, the topology may not be known with
           any precision, and it is constantly in ﬂux as links are formed and severed. Here, we
           establish an upper bound on the expected waiting time until a given proportion of the
           population has adopted that holds independently of the network structure. Kreindler
           and Young (2014) demonstrated such a bound for regular networks when agents choose
           between two options: the innovation and the status quo. Our bound holds for directed
           and undirected networks of arbitrary size and degree distribution, and for multiple
           competing innovations with different payoffs.

             KEYWORDS: Innovation diffusion, social networks, speed of equilibrium conver-
           gence.


                                          1. INTRODUCTION
SOCIAL AND TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES are essential to economic development, but the
mere existence of new and better ways of doing things does not guarantee that they will
be widely used. The time it takes to dislodge inferior practices is another crucial factor in
explaining how rapidly development can occur. This lag time depends on several crucial
factors. One is lack of information: it may not be immediately evident that the innovation
is in fact superior to the status quo. A second factor is network externalities: the desir-
ability of an innovation depends not only on its inherent payoff but on how many others
in one’s social network have also adopted. Dislodging an inferior practice or technology
requires a coordinated shift in expectations and behaviors among members of the group,
which may take a long time even if it is already evident that everyone would be better off
if they were to do so.
   There is a substantial theoretical and empirical literature on these issues that we shall
discuss below. In contrast to much of this literature, which is concerned with learning

   Itai Arieli: iarieli@technion.ac.il
   Yakov Babichenko: yakovbab@technion.ac.il
   Ron Peretz: ron.peretz@biu.ac.il
   H. Peyton Young: peyton.young@economics.ox.ac.uk
   The authors thank Uriel Feige, Abraham Neyman, Yuval Peres, Terence Tao, Amnon Schreiber, and several
anonymous referees. Itai acknowledges a support from the MOST (Grant 19400214). Yakov acknowledges a
support from the ISF (Grant 2021296).

© 2020 The Econometric Society                                           https://doi.org/10.3982/ECTA17007
570                          ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

about payoffs from the actions of prior adopters, our focus here will be on the time it
takes to dislodge an inferior practice when there are increasing returns from adoption
and the payoffs are already known. This allows us to separate the effects of pure network
externalities from the problem of learning about the payoffs by observing the behavior
of others. Moreover, unlike much of the literature, we shall focus on the question of
how long it takes to dislodge an inferior practice or technology when little or nothing is
known about the topology of social interactions. Although this would appear to omit the
main variable of interest, this is not the case. In particular, Kreindler and Young (2014)
demonstrate that the expected waiting time to overturn an inferior equilibrium can be
usefully bounded from above for all undirected regular networks.
   The theoretical contributions of this paper are three-fold. First, we establish an upper
bound on the expected waiting time that holds for networks of any size and degree distribu-
tion, whether directed or undirected. Second, we show how to extend the analysis to multiple
competing innovations, instead of a single innovation versus the status quo, which is the
usual assumption in the literature. Third, we show how the network topology affects the
results by deriving waiting time bounds that hold for speciﬁc classes of networks, includ-
ing regular networks and star networks. The mathematical techniques are novel and rely
on results characterizing the distribution of arbitrarily large sums of independent random
variables.

                                          1.1. Related Literature
    The importance of social interactions in spreading new ideas and practices has been
documented in a wide variety of situations. Ryan and Gross (1943) demonstrated that
farmers’ decisions to adopt an agricultural innovation—hybrid corn—were strongly in-
ﬂuenced by the adoption decisions of their neighbors. Subsequently, Griliches (1957)
showed that the decision to adopt also depended on the expected gains in payoff from
the innovation relative to the status quo. At about the same time, sociologists Coleman,
Katz, and Menzel (1957) analyzed the role of social networks among doctors in the adop-
tion of a new medical treatment (in this case tetracycline), and showed that adoption was
driven to a signiﬁcant extent by peer effects.1
    Since then a substantial theoretical literature has developed on the rate of innovation
diffusion as a function of the network topology. A recurrent theme is that interaction
among small close-knit groups can speed up the adoption process. The logic is that the
innovation can gain a local foothold relatively quickly, and from different local footholds
it then spreads throughout the network (Ellison (1993), and Young (1998, 2011); Monta-
nari and Saberi (2010)). Experimental studies of games played on networks are consistent
with these predictions (Centola and Baronchelli (2015)).2
    A related line of work is concerned with the time it takes for a new idea to spread when
it is seeded at one or more locations. Here, the key features are the centrality of the nodes
where the new idea is seeded, and the degree of connectivity of the network (Morris
(2000); Banerjee, Chandrasekhar, Duﬂo, and Jackson (2013)). These are instances of
“threshold” models, in which a given individual adopts once a sufﬁcient number of his

   1
     For subsequent empirical work on innovation diffusion in networks, see Valente (1995, 2005); Foster and
Rosenzweig (1995, 2010), Kohler (1997), Kohler, Behrman, and Watkins (2001), Udry and Conley (2001),
Rogers (2003), and Munshi (2006).
   2
     There is also a recent literature on the speed of convergence in games where agents interact globally instead
of with a ﬁxed set of neighbors; see, in particular, Ellison, Fudenberg, and Imhof (2016) and Arieli and Young
(2016).
                             THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                      571

neighbors have adopted (Watts (2002)). In this literature, adoption decisions are typically
treated as irreversible, whereas in the present paper we treat adoption (and disadoption)
as random variables that depend on the distribution of choices by one’s neighbors and
stochastic shocks to their perceived payoffs; they are not deterministic.
  Yet another branch of the literature investigates how network structure affects the rate
at which agents update their priors about the desirability of the innovation, based on
observation of their neighbors’ choices. issue here is the identiﬁcation of conditions on
the network topology and updating rules under which the process converges to correct
beliefs and optimal actions.3 The actual learning behavior of subjects who are embedded
in different types of networks has been investigated experimentally by Gale and Kariv
(2003) and Mäs and Nax (2016).
  In this paper, we focus instead on the situation where the payoffs are known in advance
or have already been learned. In particular, we assume that people know that the new
practice or technology would be inherently better than current practice provided that a
sufﬁcient number of people in one’s network adopted it. The source of such network
externalities depends very much on the situation. A social website is more valuable the
more people who use it. A market is more valuable the more traders it attracts. A simi-
lar logic holds for communication technologies, technological standards, and many other
innovations with increasing returns.4
  A different type of network externality arises when people are sanctioned for not con-
forming to a current norm or practice. Demographers have found, for example, that social
norms are a signiﬁcant factor in explaining the pace and pattern of contraceptive use in
developing countries.5 In the United States, norms of medical treatment for a given med-
ical condition differ widely among states and even among counties within the same state.
These differences appear to be the product of two types of network externality: peer ef-
fects and information sharing. Physicians tend to conform to the choices of local opinion
leaders, and once a given practice becomes established its beneﬁts are enhanced by local
knowledge sharing within the group.6
  These and other sources of network externalities can be modelled as a network game
in which individuals repeatedly play a coordination game against their neighbors. Indi-
viduals periodically update their choices according to a random arrivals process. When
individuals update they choose an optimal response given the inherent payoff from the
choice as modiﬁed by the current choices of their neighbors (the coordination payoff)
plus an idiosyncratic utility shock.7
  The contribution of the current paper is to establish an upper bound on the expected
waiting time until a given proportion of the population has adopted, where the bound is
independent of the size and topology of the network itself. This result is similar in spirit
to the framework of Kreindler and Young (2013, 2014), who establish an upper bound on

  3
    See Banerjee (1992), Bikhchandani, Hirschleifer, and Welch (1992), Ellison and Fudenberg (1993), Bala
and Goyal (1998), Jackson (2008), Solan, Rosenberg, and Vieille (2009), Golub and Jackson (2010, 2012),
Acemoglu, Dahleh, Lobel, and Ozdaglar (2011), Mueller-Frank (2013), Mueller-Frank and Pai (2016), and
Mossel, Sly, and Tamuz (2015).
  4
    David (1985) and Arthur (1994).
  5
    See Bongaarts and Watkins (1996), Montgomery and Casterline (1996), Kohler (1997), Kohler, Behrman,
and Watkins (2001), and Munshi and Myaux (2006).
  6
    See Wennberg and Gittelsohn (1973), Phelps and Mooney (1993), Chandra and Staiger (2007), and Burke,
Fournier, and Prasad (2007, 2010).
  7
    See among others Blume (1993), Jackson and Yariv (2007), Jackson (2008), Vega-Redondo (2007), and
Golub and Jackson (2010, 2010).
572                         ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

the waiting time for all regular undirected networks and a logit model of errors. Here,
we employ different mathematical methods to establish a more general bound on the
waiting time that holds for all directed and undirected networks of arbitrary size, and for
a very broad class of error distributions. These bounds are especially useful when the
network is difﬁcult to observe and is constantly changing as agents form and sever links
with one another.8 The mathematical techniques rely on recent advances in estimating
the distribution of arbitrarily large sums of independent random variables (Feige (2006),
Garnett (2020)).
   A common technique for the analysis of innovation diffusion in large networks is the
mean ﬁeld approach (see, e.g., Young (2009)). We use this approach in Proposition 6.1 to
derive a tight bound on the expected waiting time in large regular networks. The mean
ﬁeld approach, however, is not suitable for proving our main result (Theorem 3.1) which
holds even when agents are arbitrarily heterogeneous with respect to their degree and the
inﬂuence they exert on one another.
   The plan of the paper is as follows. In the next section, we formulate the stochastic up-
dating model. In Sections 3–4, we establish a general bound on the expected waiting time
until a target proportion of the population has adopted, starting from the state where
everyone is playing the status quo. The bound depends on the shape of the error distribu-
tion, on the payoff gap between the innovation and the status quo, and on the magnitude
of the coordination payoffs relative to the inherent payoffs from different choices, but it
does not depend on the topology of the network per se. Section 5 extends the analysis to
multiple competing innovations. In Section 6, we show how the waiting time depends on
the topology of the network by considering two contrasting cases: regular networks and
star networks. In particular, we show that the bound established by Kreindler and Young
(2014) for large regular networks can be substantially improved.

                                                   2. MODEL
   A weighted directed network with m nodes can be represented by an m × m row-
stochastic matrix P(t) = {Pij (t)}. We interpret Pij (t) as the probability that agent i in-
teracts with j during the current period.9 Alternatively, we can view Pij (t) as the relative
weight that i attaches to interactions with j in the current period. For expositional sim-
plicity, we shall begin by considering the situation where each agent chooses one of two
actions: the innovation (action 1) or the status quo (action 0). In Section 5, we shall extend
the analysis to multiple innovations with different payoffs.
   The payoff from choosing an action consists of two parts: (i) an inherent payoff that
is independent of how many others choose it, and (ii) a coordination payoff that results
from coordinating with others. For an interaction with a single neighbor, we represent the
payoffs by the following 2 × 2 matrix:

                                                    0     1
                                               0    c     0
                                               1    a    a+c

  8
    There is a large literature on the dynamics of link formation in social networks. See, among others, Skyrms
and Pemantle (2000), Jackson and Watts (2002), Goyal and Vega-Redondo (2007), and Jackson (2002).
  9
    We allow for the possibility that Pii (t) > 0, that is, i’s own action in the previous period increases the
probability that he chooses it again next period. This can be interpreted as a form of inertia.
                          THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                              573

    Here, a > 0 is the payoff difference between the innovation 1 and the status quo 0, and
c > 0 is the coordination payoff that results from making the same choice as someone
with whom one interacts. Note that when c < a the innovation is a dominant strategy and
there is a unique equilibrium whereas if c > a there are three equilibria: two pure and
one mixed. The subsequent analysis holds in either case but we shall typically assume that
there are multiple equilibria.
    The state of the process at the end of each period t is an m-vector s(t) ∈ {0 1}m , where
si (t) = 1 if agent i chooses the innovation at t, and si (t) = 0 otherwise. The updating
process works as follows. Time is continuous and the initial state is s(0) = (0        0). We
suppose that every agent receives updating opportunities according to a Poisson arrival
process with rate one per time period, where these processes are independent among
the individuals. Suppose that i receives such an opportunity at time t. Given the current
network structure P = P(t) and the current state s(t), let

                                       xi (t) =           Pij sj (t)
                                                  j∈[m]


Thus i’s expected payoff from interacting with a randomly drawn neighbor (drawn ac-
cording the distribution P(t)) is ui (1) = a + cxi (t) if he chooses action 1, and ui (0) =
c(1 − xi (t)) if he chooses action 0.
   Let us assume that the difference between the payoff from 1 and the payoff from 0
is perturbed by a random payoff shock i (t) with c.d.f. F( ). For ease of interpretation,
we shall assume that F has a density f ( ) and that all shocks are i.i.d. among agents
and among time periods. If the perturbed payoff difference is positive, agent i chooses
action 1; otherwise he chooses action 0. This class of perturbed best reply dynamics is
very general and includes such standard dynamics as the logit response, where the payoff
shocks are extreme-valued distributed. Experimental evidence on learning in networks
shows that subjects do deviate from best reply with a probability that is decreasing in the
resulting payoff loss, which is consistent with this class of models (Maes and Nax (2016)).
   Conditional on receiving an updating opportunity at time t, the probability that i
chooses 1 is

        P si (t) = 1|xi (t) = P a + i (t) + cxi (t) > c 1 − xi (t)
                           =P    i   (t) > c − a − 2cxi (t) = 1 − F c − a − 2cxi (t)     (1)

We shall call this the response function and write

                            r xi (t) = 1 − F c − a − 2cxi (t)                            (2)

   Note that r(·) is monotone, nondecreasing, continuous, and 0 ≤ r(0) ≤ r(1) ≤ 1. (Con-
tinuity follows from our assumption that F has a density.) In what follows, we shall as-
sume that r(0) > 0, that is, F(c − a) < 1. This amounts to saying that even when none of
i’s neighbors has adopted the innovation, there is a positive probability that i will switch
from 0 to 1 due to receiving a sufﬁciently large payoff shock.
   Figure 1 shows an example of a response function based on the normal distribution.
   Although we have derived the response function from a speciﬁc shock distribution F , in
what follows we can view the response function as a primitive of the model: r(x) speciﬁes
the probability that an agent chooses action 1 whenever a (weighted) proportion x of
the agent’s neighbors choose action 1. Note that the same response function holds for all
agents and is independent of the particular network through which they interact.
574                         ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG




                     FIGURE 1.—A response function based on the normal distribution.



  Given a response function r(x), deﬁne the supporting line L(x) to be the unique line
that solves the following maximization problem:

                     max L(0)
                        subject to L(1) = r(1) and L(x) ≤ r(x) for x ∈ [0 1]

The slope of L will be denoted by 1 − α := L(1) − L(0) < 1, and its ﬁxed point will be
denoted by p = L(0)
                  α
                    , as shown in Figure 2.10
   In what follows, we shall focus on the case L(0) > 0. The conditions under which this
assumption holds are discussed in Section 3.1. In particular, it fails to hold if the response
function is too “bowed,” and crosses the 45◦ line at a low value of x as shown in Figure 3.
In this case, the adoption process can become trapped in a low-level equilibrium for a
very long time; indeed the expected waiting time until a low proportion q of the agents
have adopted is unbounded in the network size for some classes of networks, as we show
in Section 6.3.




               FIGURE 2.—Supporting line L(x) (dashed) and response function r(x) (solid).


   10
      We note that the ﬁxed point p of the supporting line is always smaller than the ﬁxed point of the response
function.
                               THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                            575




             FIGURE 3.—Response function with L(0) < 0, and a low value q such that r(q) < q.


                             3. A GENERAL RESULT ON WAITING TIMES
   The question we wish to address is the following: starting from the state s(0) =
(0     0) and given a target proportion q ∈ [0 1], how long does it take in expectation to
reach a state in which at least qm agents have adopted the innovation? More precisely,
we wish to ﬁnd an upper bound on the expected waiting time deﬁned as follows:
                                                 1
                 Tq F P(t) = E min t :                   si (t) ≥ q s(0) = (0           0)
                                                 m i∈[m]

We can now state our main result.

  THEOREM 3.1: Let F be an error distribution function with density f . Suppose that the
supporting line L(x) satisﬁes L(0) > 0, has slope 1 − α, ﬁxed point p, and q < p. Then for
every dynamic network P(t) we have
                                  72         p                     72          p
                Tq F P(t) ≤          1 + ln                   =        1 + ln                                (3)
                                  pα        p−q                   L(0)        p−q

  The crucial point is that the right-hand side does not depend on the network structure
or on how rapidly it is evolving.
  As we mentioned earlier, the closest result in the literature is due to Kreindler and
Young (2014). Using martingale methods, they derive the following upper bound on the
expected waiting time until at least qm agents have adopted and P(t) is any regular,
undirected network, namely11
                                                              1
                                        Tq F P(t) ≤                                                          (4)
                                                           α(p − q)

    11
       To illustrate their approach, let G be a complete undirected network. Given q < p, let μ = L(q) − q.
Assuming that L(0) > 0, we have L(x) − x > μ ≥ 0, for all x ∈ [0 q ]. Given a proportion x(t) ≤ q, the expected
increase next period is E[x(t + 1) − x(t)|x(t)] ≥ μ > 0. It follows that the expected waiting time until x(t) ≥ q
is at most μ1 . Since L(x) = (1 − α)x + αp, μ = α(p − q), and hence T ≤ α(p−q)1
                                                                                 . In fact, the same bound holds
for all regular networks; moreover, if q = 2 the bound can be improved to T ≤ α(p−q)
                                             1                                       0 42
                                                                                            (Kreindler and Young
(2014), Lemma 2).
576                        ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

   The same bound holds for irregular networks provided that the target q is expressed
as the degree-weighted proportion of adopting agents. This criterion is different from
insisting that a given proportion of agents adopt. In a star network, for example, a degree-
weighted majority (q = 12 ) is achieved when just the central node has adopted. A compar-
ison of (3) and (4) shows that the latter is a better (i.e., lower) bound unless q is very close
to p. Indeed (4) is less than (3) provided that

                                   p                p
                                      > 7 2 1 + ln
                                  p−q              p−q

which holds whenever q < 0 969p. However, our bound is much more general because it
holds for directed and undirected networks of any size and degree distribution. In Sec-
                                                                                         p
tion 6.1, we show that for large regular networks the waiting time is precisely α1 ln( p−q  ),
which is considerably tighter than the Kreindler–Young bound. Note, however, that for a
                                                                                          p
ﬁxed p our general bound (3) is just a linear transformation of the special bound α1 ln( p−q )
which is tight for regular networks. This result shows that our bound is of the right order
with respect to q for a given p.


                            3.1. Discussion of the Condition L(0) > 0
   A key assumption underlying Theorem 3.1 is that the tangent line L(x) must have a
strictly positive intercept L(0). If this is not the case, the theorem does not apply. When
will L(0) be negative? The answer is when the payoff advantage a is small relative to
the coordination payoff c, and/or the variance of the distribution F is small. Recall that
r(0) = 1 − F(c − a) and r(1) = 1 − F(−a − c). For ease of exposition suppose also that f
is symmetric about 0, so that the inﬂection point of F occurs at 0. Then r(0) = F(a − c)
and r(1) = F(a + c). Increasing a to a + b shifts the origin as shown in Figure 4. When b is
large enough, the intercept of the supporting line become positive (see Figure 4, bottom
panel).
   The second case is illustrated in Figure 5. Rescaling the standard deviation by an
amount σ is equivalent to rescaling the horizontal axis by σ1 , which leads to a positive
intercept if σ is large enough, as shown in the bottom panel of Figure 5.
   More generally, given a response function r(x) we have

                                                        r(x) − xr(1)
                                     L(0) = inf                                                        (5)
                                              x∈[0 1)      1−x

  Therefore, L(0) > 0 iff r(x) > xr(1) for every x ∈ [0 1). If r is induced by a c.d.f. F ,
then r(x) = 1 − F(c − a − 2cx). In this case, the condition becomes 1 − F(c − a − 2cx) >
x(1 − F(−a − c)) for every x ∈ [0 1).12


                                 3.2. Proof Sketch of Theorem 3.1
   Conditional on receiving a revision opportunity, an agent chooses action 1 with proba-
bility r(x), where x is the weighted average proportion of his neighbors who are currently

  12
     In case a ≥ c and the density f is symmetric and unimodal, the response function is concave, and hence
L(0) > 0.
                              THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                         577




   FIGURE 4.—For a given c.d.f. F( ), increasing the payoff advantage of the innovation by an amount b
increases the intercept L(0). Here, F(a + b − c) = r(0) and F(a + b + c) = r(1).




  FIGURE 5.—Increasing the standard deviation of the error distribution by a factor σ increases the intercept
L(0). Here, F( a−
                σ
                  c
                    ) = r(0) and F( a+
                                     σ
                                       c
                                         ) = r(1).
578                        ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

choosing 1. The idea is to analyze the linear dynamic where an agent that faces the pro-
portion x updates his action to 1 with probability L(x) instead of r(x). Since L(x) ≤ r(x),
for every time t we have

                               r xi (t) ≥ pα + (1 − α)            Pij (t)sj (t)
                                                              j


In particular, the expected time it takes for the linear dynamic to reach the threshold q is
at least as long as the expected time under the actual dynamic.
   An advantage of analyzing the linear dynamic is that it can be viewed as an imitation
dynamic. Namely, at every revision opportunity, the revising agent i acts as follows: with
probability α he chooses his action according to a coin toss with probability of success p.
With probability (1 − α), he imitates a neighbor that is drawn according to the distribution
Pi (t).13 Thus the probability that i chooses 1 is
                                    αp + (1 − α)xi (t) = L xi (t)                                        (6)
   In what follows, it will be notationally convenient to analyze the corresponding discrete
time linear dynamic such that at each time t one agent is chosen uniformly at random to
update his action. (This discrete time dynamic is m times slower than the corresponding
continuous time dynamic, where m is the number of agents.)
   A history of the imitation dynamic up to time T induces an imitation forest, which is
deﬁned as follows. Each vertex of the imitation forest is a pair (i t) ∈ [m] × [T ]. There is
an edge from (i t) to (j t − 1) if at time t agent i copied agent’s j action at time t − 1. In
addition, there is an edge from (i t) to (i t − 1) if i was not chosen to update at time t.
This construction is illustrated in Figure 6.
   The imitation forest admits two types of roots. A coin-toss root is a vertex (i t) such
that i tossed a coin at time t. An origin root is a vertex (i 0) for i ∈ [m]. This induces a
partition of the population at time t into two groups. A coin-toss agent is one that belongs
to a tree with a coin-toss root. Similarly, an origin agent is one that belongs to a tree with
an origin root.
   The proof of Theorem 3.1 consists of two key steps.

   Step 1. First, we show that the proportion of coin-toss agents increases at a rate that is
bounded below by a simple formula that is independent of the network. This provides an
explicit formula for the expected number of coin toss agents at each time t. We then apply
Markov’s inequality to show that with high probability the proportion of coin-toss agents
is large at all sufﬁciently large times t.

  Step 2. At each point in time, the proportion of agents that play 1 is a weighted av-
erage of a sequence of 0–1 random variables that correspond to prior coin tosses. Since
we allow the network to evolve over time, analyzing these weights is extremely difﬁcult.
Nevertheless, we are able to overcome this hurdle by the following lemma, which follows
readily from Feige’s inequality (Feige (2006)) and its subsequent improvement by Garnett
(2020). (See the Appendix for further details).14

   13
      This set-up bears some resemblance to the “voter model” in which a randomly drawn agent imitates a
randomly drawn neighbor Liggett (1999). In our model, by contrast, imitation only occurs with probability
1 − α; otherwise the agent chooses action 1 with probability p. This leads to a fully ergodic process whereas
the voter model eventually absorbs into the all-0 or all-1 state.
   14
      Billingsley ((2008), Theorem 9.2) has a different bound that depends on higher moments of the Bernoulli
random variable, but the bound is not as good for values of p close to 1. See Appendix A for further details.
                                THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                            579

                  5
                                                                                        Coin-toss agents
                  4

    Agents        3
                                                                                        Origin agents
                  2

                  1

                          0        1         2         3       4     5      6       7
                                                                                          time

   FIGURE 6.—The imitation forest of the following history. At time t = 1, agent 3 imitates agent 2. At time
t = 2, agent 4 tosses a coin. At time t = 3, agent 2 imitates agent 4. At time t = 4, agent 2 imitates agent 1. At
time t = 5, agent 3 imitates agent 2. At time t = 6, agent 1 tosses a coin. At time t = 7, agent 5 imitates agent
4. Square nodes are points where an agent tossed a coin.


  LEMMA 1: Let c1     c k be i.i.d. Bernoulli(p) random variables. For all k and every
sequence of weights 1     k ≥ 0,

                                        k

                                   P             c ≥
                                                 i i           i   p ≥ 0 14p
                                       i=1                 i


   This corollary allows us to place a nonzero lower bound on the probability that a given
proportion of the agents are choosing action 1 by time t, which leads to an upper bound
on the expected waiting time to reach a given target proportion q for any interaction
structure.

                                       4. PROOF OF THEOREM 3.1
  As was mentioned in the proof sketch (Section 3.2), we shall analyze the discrete-time
imitation dynamic in which one randomly drawn agent updates per period. Since each
agent’s Poisson clock has rate 1, the discrete process is m times slower then the actual
continuous process. We shall prove that for the discrete dynamic the expected waiting
time satisﬁes the bound
                                                       7 2m         p
                                Tq F P(t) ≤                 1 + ln
                                                        pα         p−q
    First, we analyze the diffusion of coin-toss agents. Consider the following process: the
initial state is y(0) = (yi (0))i∈[m] = (0    0), and in each period one player i ∈ [m] is
drawn at random to update. With probability α, yi (t) = 1, and with probability 1 − α,
yi (t) = yj (t − 1), where j is drawn according to Pi (t).

   LEMMA 2: The probability that an agent is coin-toss at time t is independent of the network
structure and is equal to p(t) = P(yi (t) = 1) = 1 − (1 − mα )t .
580                          ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

  PROOF: This claim is established by induction on t. For t = 0, the claim is trivial. As-
sume that the equality holds for t. Than it holds for t + 1, because
                                             1                       1
                   P yi (t + 1) = 1 =          α + (1 − α)p(t) + 1 −   p(t)
                                             m                       m
                                             α      α
                                         =     + 1−   p(t)
                                             m      m
                                                                                    t
                                          α     α                          α
                                         = + 1−                      1− 1−
                                          m     m                          m
                                                               t+1
                                                          α
                                         =1− 1−                      = p(t + 1)
                                                          m                                     Q.E.D.

  PROOF OF THEOREM 3.1: Let T̃q be the ﬁrst time at which at least qm agents have
adopted. We seek to bound E[T̃q ] = Tq (F P(t)) from above independently of P(t).
Lemma 2 shows that the expected number of coin-toss agents at time t is given by
E[ i yi (t)] = m − m(1 − mα )t . Let us set a threshold of pq m for the number of coin-toss
agents. We use Markov’s inequality to bound the probability that the number of coin-toss
agents is less than pq m, namely,

                                        q                                          q
                    P        yi (t) <     m =P             1 − yi (t) > 1 −          m
                         i
                                        p             i
                                                                                   p
                                                                                         t
                                                  E        1 − yi (t)                α
                                                                                 1−
                                                      i                              m
                                              ≤                             =        q              (7)
                                                               q                  1−
                                                          1−     m                   p
                                                               p
    At each point in time t, let R(t) = {r1 (t)              rk(t) (t)}, be the relevant coin-toss roots
at t, and denote by c1 (t)               ck(t) (t) ∈ {0 1} their realized actions. Note that for any
ﬁxed t, c1 (t)         ck(t) (t) are i.i.d. Bernoulli(p) random variables. For notational con-
venience, we let c0 = 0. Let ϕ(i t) be the function that associates each coin-toss agent
with the corresponding root. Formally, if i is a coin-toss agent at time t and (i t) be-
longs to a tree with root rj (t) then ϕ(i t) = j. If i is an origin agent at time t, we let
ϕ(i t) = 0. Finally, for every j ∈ [k(t)] we let j (t) = |{i : ϕ(i t) = j}| be the num-
ber of appearances of the coin-toss root j, with the corresponding action cj (t). Note
that     i∈[m] yi (t) =     j∈[k(t)] j (t). The state of the dynamic s(t) can be expressed as
si (t) = cϕ(i t) , hence i si (t) = j∈[k(t)] j (t)cj (t).
    In order to bound T̃q from above, we deﬁne the stopping time

                                                                      q
                                   τ := min t :           yi (t) >      m
                                                      i
                                                                      p

and the event

                        E := ω :         j   τ(ω) cj τ(ω) ≥                 j   τ(ω) p
                                    j                                  j
                           THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                    581

Note that ω ∈ E implies that T̃q (ω) ≤ τ(ω). Since τ is measurable with respect to the
imitation process and {c1 (τ)     ck(τ) (τ)} are i.i.d. Bernoulli(p) random variables condi-
tioned on the imitation process, Lemma 1 implies that

                                       P(E |τ) ≥ 0 14p                                          (8)

  We next show that
                                          m         p
                                 E[τ] ≤     1 + ln                                              (9)
                                          α        p−q
Indeed,
                                  ⎧                  t
                                                         ⎫
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪             α        ⎪
                                                         ⎪        q
             ∞              ∞     ⎪
                                  ⎨          1−          ⎪
                                                         ⎬   ln 1 −          ∞              t
                                                m                 p                     α
     E[τ] =     P(τ > t) ≤     min 1            q          ≤             +         1−
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎪          1−          ⎪
                                                         ⎪        α                     m
            t=0            t=0    ⎪
                                  ⎩                      ⎪
                                                         ⎭ ln 1 −            t=0
                                                p                 m
                   p
                ln
                 p−q             m m     p    m
           =−                +     ≤ ln     +
                     α           α  α   p−q   α
              ln 1 −
                     m

The ﬁrst inequality follows from (7), and the last inequality from the inequality ln(1+x) ≤
x.
   By restarting a new imitation process after τ, we can deﬁne a sequence of stopping
times τ = τ1 < τ2 < · · · , and corresponding sequence of events E1 E2            in the above
fashion. Namely, τi+1 is the ﬁrst time at which there are at least pq m coin-toss agents in
the imitation process that starts at time τi , and Ei+1 is the event that the corresponding
weighted sum of coin-toss realizations reaches or exceeds its expectation. Letting i∗ be
the ﬁrst success of one of the events Ei , we have T̃q ≤ τi∗ . Since the law of (τi+1 − τi Ei+1 )
(conditioned on the history up to time τi ) obeys the same conditions as those of (τ E ),
the uniform bounds (8) and (9) apply also to the pairs (τi+1 − τi Ei+1 ), i = 1 2          con-
ditioned on the history up to time τi . Therefore,

                                     1 m           p                  7 2m         p
 Tq F P(t) = E[T̃q ] ≤ E[τi∗ ] ≤           1 + ln                =         1 + ln
                                   0 14p α        p−q                  pα         p−q

Recalling that the actual adoption dynamic with i.i.d. Poisson updating is m times faster
than the discrete time dynamic, the statement of Theorem 3.1 follows.            Q.E.D.


                                 5. MULTIPLE TECHNOLOGIES
  So far we have analyzed the case where there are two competing technologies: the
status quo and the innovation. In practice, multiple innovations may be competing for
acceptance at any given point in time. In this section, we explain how our results can be
extended to this more general case.
582                         ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

  Consider the case where the action set A = {1      k } consists of k alternatives, includ-
ing the status quo. We shall assume that the payoff matrix U has the following form:

                                            1          2            ···       k
                               1         a1 + c       a1            ···       a1
                            U= 2           a2       a2 + c          ···       a2


                                   k       ak         ak            ···      ak + c

Here, ai is the utility from choosing technology i and c is the utility from coordination,
which for simplicity we assume is the same for all technologies. (The model can also ac-
commodate heterogeneous coordination payoffs but the notation is more cumbersome.)
We shall assume, without loss of generality, that a1 > a2 > · · · > ak . Let j be the idiosyn-
cratic payoff shock from playing alternative j. We assume that the shocks ( j )j=1 k are
nonatomic, i.i.d., and have mean zero.
  Given a distribution x = (x1       x k ) ∈ α(A), let ri (x) be the probability that technol-
ogy i is the best-reply alternative for an agent facing this distribution:

                               ri (x) = P (Ux)i ≥ (Ux)j for all j ∈ A

Let r(x) = (r1 (x)   r k (x)) denote the multidimensional response function.
  For every value x ∈ [0 1], let ρ(x) be the minimum probability that an agent adopts
technology 1 when the proportion x of his neighbors have adopted technology 1:

                                         ρ(x) =       min           r1 (x)                               (10)
                                                  x∈αk s.t. x1 =x


We replace the function r of the two technologies case with the function ρ. We now ap-
proximate ρ using a linear function L as described above. Note that for every vector of
proportions x,
                                         r1 (x) ≥ ρ(x1 ) ≥ L(x1 )
We can therefore use Theorem 3.1 to approximate the expected waiting time until a pro-
portion q < p have adopted the superior technology 1.
  Deriving the function ρ explicitly from the multidimensional response function r is not
always straightforward. However, for a wide class of shock distributions used in empirical
applications, ρ can easily be derived from r, as the following result shows.

  LEMMA 3: If the payoff shock distribution F is log concave, then for every x ∈ [0 1],

                                     ρ(x) = r1 (x 1 − x 0                    0)

  In other words, if F is log concave, then the technology distribution that minimizes the
switching probability to technology 1 across all distributions with x1 = x occurs when the
proportion playing technology 2 equals 1 − x.15

  15
     For example, the extreme value distribution, which generates the logit response, is log concave, and so is
the normal distribution, which generates the probit response. In contrast, the Cauchy and the Pareto distribu-
tions are not log concave.
                          THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                               583

  Before providing the proof, note that

                         Ux = (a1 + cx1 a 2 + cx2        a n + cxn )

  PROOF: Consider the case where the realized payoff shock for technology 1 equals ε1 .
In this case the payoff from using technology 1 is u1 = a1 + cx + ε1 . It is sufﬁcient to show
that across all x ∈ αk with x1 = x, the vector (x 1 − x 0      0) minimizes the probability

                            P (Ux)j + j ≤ u1 for j = 2         k                         (11)

Note that the probability in (11) equals

                          F(u1 − a2 − cx2 ) · · · F(u1 − ak − cxk )                      (12)

We wish to ﬁnd x ∈ αk that minimizes (12) subject to x1 = x. It follows from the log
concavity of F that the product in (12) is also log concave. Since the domain, {x ∈ αk :
x1 = x}, is convex and compact it follows that the minimum is attained at an extreme
point.
  It remains to show that the extreme point at which the minimum is attained is (x 1 −
x 0      0). We contend that the log concavity of F implies that for every j ∈ A \ {1 2}
the function
                     g(z) = ln F(u1 − aj + z) − ln F(u1 − a2 + z)
is decreasing in z. To see this, note that u1 − aj > u1 − a2 for all j ≥ 3. Since the function
h(z) = ln(F(z)) is concave, the slope

                          ln F(u1 − aj + z) − ln F(u1 − a2 + z)
                                          a2 − aj

is decreasing in z. In particular, g(0) ≤ g(−(1 − x)c). This implies that for every j ∈
A \ {1 2},

          F u1 − a2 − (1 − x)c F(u1 − aj ) ≤ F(u1 − a2 )F u1 − aj − (1 − x)c

Therefore, for every j ∈ A \ {1 2}

                 F u1 − a2 − (1 − x)c F(u1 − a3 ) · · · F(u1 − ak )
                    ≤ F(u1 − a2 ) · · · F u1 − aj − (1 − x)c · · · F(u1 − ak )

This concludes the proof of the lemma.                                                Q.E.D.

                              6. THE ROLE OF THE NETWORK
   Our main result shows that, under certain conditions on the payoff shock distribution,
the expected waiting time until the innovation is adopted by a large fraction of the popu-
lation is uniformly bounded for all networks of arbitrary size. Moreover, the bound remains
valid even when the network varies over time. In this section, we discuss the role that the
network topology plays in the diffusion process when the network remains ﬁxed. We focus
on simple classes of networks such as regular networks and star networks and demonstrate
network-dependent behavior in these cases.
584                    ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

   We address three closely related questions. First, for regular networks and star net-
works, we derive bounds on the speed of convergence that improve on the bound in The-
orem 3.1. Furthermore, we show that for star networks, rapid convergence holds even for
values of q that are greater than the ﬁxed point p.
   Second, we study the question of persistence. Once the adoption process reaches a
high proportion q of adopters, how likely is it that the proportion remains high for an
extended period of time? As we shall see, the answer depends on both the size of the
network and its topological structure. When the network is small, it only takes a handful
of agents to revert to playing action 0 for the proportion to drop substantially below q.
Indeed, reversion for any particular agent will occur with probability at least 1 − r(1),
which will typically be positive. Therefore, for small networks we cannot expect that a high
proportion of adopters will be maintained for very long. Even if the network is large, the
degree of persistence is sensitive to the network topology. We shall show in particular that
for large regular networks persistence is high, whereas for large star networks persistence
is low (see Section 6.2).
   Finally we ask, given a response function r, for which values of q is the expected waiting
time unbounded? The answer depends on the topology of the network. In star networks,
the expected waiting time to reach a target q < r(1) is bounded above for all monotone
increasing response functions (Proposition 6.2). In contrast, for regular networks, the ex-
pected waiting time to reach a target q < r(q) increases exponentially in the degree of the
network (Proposition 6.5).


                       6.1. Convergence Rates for Speciﬁc Networks
   We begin by providing an exact formula for the convergence time of the linear dynamic
in large regular networks. An undirected network G is regular if all agents have the same
degree d ≥ 0. As before, for every q ∈ [0 1], we let Tq (G) be the expected waiting time
until at least the proportion q of the agents have adopted.

  PROPOSITION 6.1: Let r(x) = L(x) = (1 − α)x + αp be a linear dynamic and let
q ∈ [0 p). For every m ≥ 1, let Rm be an undirected, regular network with m nodes. Then
limm→∞ Tq (Rm ) = α1 ln( p−q
                          p
                             ).

  PROOF: We rely on stochastic approximation results due to Benaim (1998) and Roth
and Sandholm (2013). Let {xm t } be the discrete time process representing the proportion
of adopters in Rm at time t. Let Ft be the sigma algebra that is generated by the sequence
of actions of the agents in Rm up to and including time t. For any proportion x ∈ [0 1], let
V (x) = α(p − x). We contend that

                                                        V (xm t )
                              E(xm t+1 − xm t |Ft ) =
                                                           m
In particular, the expected change in next period’s proportion depends only on the current
proportion and not on the network conﬁguration.
   To see this, consider the case where the current proportion xm t = x and an agent is se-
lected uniformly at random to revise his strategy choice. With probability α, the selected
agent chooses action 1 with conditional probability p, and chooses action 0 with condi-
tional probability 1 − p. With probability 1 − α, the agent imitates the action of a randomly
                          THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                              585

chosen neighbor. Let d(t) be the number of edges i j where the actions of agents i and j
are distinct. We can write
                                        1                              d(t)
                 P xm t+1 − xm t =        Ft = (1 − xm t )αp + (1 − α)                   (13)
                                        m                              2|E|

Similarly,
                                        1                              d(t)
                P xm t+1 − xm t = −       Ft = αxm t (1 − p) + (1 − α)                   (14)
                                        m                              2|E|
It follows from (13) and (14) that

                                                     1                          1
                                P xm t+1 − xm t =      |Ft − P xm t+1 − xm t = − |Ft
                                                     m                          m
      E(xm t+1 − xm t |Ft ) =
                                                           m
                                V (xm t )
                           =                                                             (15)
                                   m
Hence for any m and t we can write

                                                  Um t+1 V (xm t )
                                xm t+1 − xm t −         =                                (16)
                                                   m        m
where Um t+1 = m(xm t+1 − xm t ) − V (xm t ) is a bounded Ft+1 -measurable random variable.
Furthermore, equations (15) and (16) imply that E(Um t+1 |Ft ) = 0. Therefore, the process
{(Um t )t }m satisﬁes the conditions of Proposition 2.3 in Roth and Sandholm (2013) and we
can use Theorem 3.2 in Roth and Sandholm (2013) to approximate our process {(xm t )t }m
by a differential equation as illustrated below.
  Let {xm (s)}s≥0 be the continuous-time process deﬁned by

                                            xm (s) = xm ms

For any x ∈ [0 1], let zx be the solution of the following differential equation:

                           ż = L(z) − z = V (z)             z(0) = x

Theorem 3.2 in Roth and Sandholm (2013) implies that, for every δ > 0, x ∈ [0 1] and
T > 0,

                    lim P sup xm (s + t) − zx (s) ≥ δ xm (t) = x = 0
                   m→∞     s∈[0 T ]

where the limit holds uniformly in x. Note that z0 (s) = p(1 − exp(−αs)) and for s =
1
α
       p
  ln( p−q ) we have z0 (s ) = q. In addition, for every x ∈ [0 1] and every > 0 we have
zx (s + ) > q. Therefore, for every > 0, x ∈ [0 1] and t > 0, limm→∞ P(xm (s + t + ) <
q|xm (t) = x) = 0, and hence

                                                    1     p
                                  lim Tq (Rm ) =      ln
                                  m→∞               α    p−q

as was to be shown.                                                                    Q.E.D.
586                     ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

  Next, we turn to estimating the expected convergence time for large star networks. Let
Sm consist of m vertices with central vertex 1 and edges {1 j } for all j ∈ [m] such that j > 1.
We shall show that for every monotone increasing response function, rapid convergence
can hold for values q > p beyond the ﬁxed point.
  Let Tq (Sm ) be the expected waiting time to reach at least qm adopters in the star net-
work with m agents.

  PROPOSITION 6.2: Consider any star network Sm and an adoption dynamic that is gov-
erned by a monotone increasing response function r : [0 1] → [0 1]. For every q < r(1),

                                           r(1)      1          r(1)
                   lim sup Tq (Sm ) ≤                    + ln
                     m→∞                 r(1) − q   r(0)      r(1) − q

  PROOF: Consider the following event: agent 1 updates his action to 1 and thereafter
 q
   m agents receive a revision opportunity. We claim that the expected waiting time for
r(1)
this event is bounded above by

                                     1          r(1)
                                         + ln
                                    r(0)      r(1) − q

Indeed, r(10) bounds the expected waiting time for agent 1 to switch to action 1, and
      r(1)                                                 mq
ln( r(1)−q ) bounds the expected waiting time for at least r(1) agents to have a revision op-
portunity (this is an instance of the coupon collector problem; see, e.g., Section 3.6 in
Motwani and Raghavan (1995)). Note that with probability r(r(1)1−) q agent 1 is not part of
the fraction r(q1) of agents who receive a revision opportunity.
   Now consider the following event: agent 1 updates his action to 1 and thereafter at least
 qm
r(1)
     of the agents, not including 1, receive a revision opportunity. By the preceding, the
expected waiting time for this event is at most

                                r(1)        1          r(1)
                                                + ln
                              r(1) − q     r(0)      r(1) − q

Each of the r(qm1) agents who receives an updating opportunity chooses action 1 with proba-
bility r(1) because during their revision time agent 1 is playing action 1. Therefore, condi-
tional on this event, the probability of reaching a threshold of q − ε adopters approaches
one as m goes to inﬁnity, for every > 0. This establishes Proposition 6.2.            Q.E.D.

  We note, in particular, that for a linear dynamic on star networks, the determinant of
the fast adoption regime is L(1) and not the ﬁxed point p < L(1). Hence even when q is
close to p, the expected waiting time to reach at least qm adopters is much faster in large
star networks than in large regular networks.

                              6.2. The Persistence of Innovation
   In this section, we show that innovation is persistent for large regular networks, whereas
it is not persistent for star networks.
   Recall that p denotes the ﬁxed point of the linear dynamic. Fix q q ∈ (0 p) with q < q
and consider the expected waiting time for the population to reach a state with at most
                          THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                587

q m adopters from a state with at least qm adopters. Say that innovation is persistent for
a class of networks if this expected waiting time grows to inﬁnity with the population size
m for any such pair q q .
  Formally given a pair q < q < p and a network G, let Iq q (G) be the minimal expected
waiting time to reach a state in which the proportion of adopters is q or less, where the
minimum is taken across all initial conditions with proportion at least q. We next show
that innovation is persistent for the class of regular networks.

  PROPOSITION 6.3: Let Rm be a regular network with m agents. For every 0 < q < q < p,
there exists a constant c = c(q q ) > 1 (independent of m) such that Iq q (Rm ) ≥ c m .

  It follows that the expected waiting time until the fraction of adopters is lower than q ,
starting from a state where the fraction is at least q > q , grows exponentially with the
number of agents m. (The proof is contained in the Appendix). In contrast, for the class
of star networks, persistence fails and the adoption dynamic escapes from any targeted
proportion relatively quickly, as the following proposition shows.

  PROPOSITION 6.4: Let Sm be a star network with m agents and let r(x) be a response
function with r(1) < 1 and r(0) < 12 . There exists a constant c > 0 (independent of m) such
that I1 1 (Sm ) ≤ c.
       2


  Thus, even if we start in the state where all agents have adopted, the expected waiting
time to reach a state with a proportion of adopters below 12 is bounded above.

  PROOF: The proof is similar to the the proof of Proposition 6.2. Let γ = 4(1−r(0))
                                                                                 3−2r(0)
                                                                                         . Note
                               γ−1/2
that since r(0) < 1/2 we have γ > r(0) and γ < 1. Consider the following event: agent 1
updates his action to 0 and thereafter a fraction γ of agents receive a revision opportunity.
As above, the expected waiting time for this event is bounded above by
                                      1           1
                                            + ln
                                   1 − r(1)      1−γ
Note that with probability 1 − γ agent 1 is not part of the fraction r(q1) of agents who
receive a revision opportunity.
  Therefore, the expected waiting time of the following event: agent 1 updates his action
to 0 and thereafter a fraction γ of the agents, which does not include agent 1, receive a
revision opportunity is
                                1       1           1
                                              + ln
                             (1 − γ) 1 − r(1)      1−γ
Each of the γm agents who receives an updating opportunity chooses action 1 with prob-
ability r(0) because during their revision time agent 1 is playing action 0. By the choice
of γ, there exists a positive probability w > 0 that at most γ−γ1/2 > r(0) of the γm agents
have chosen action 1, independently of m. If this holds, the number of adopters is at most
γ γ−1/2
    γ
        + (1 − γ) ≤ 1/2.
   This shows that
                                   1          1             1
                         I1 1 ≤                     + ln
                            2   w(1 − γ) 1 − r(1)         1−γ
which establishes Proposition 6.4.                                                     Q.E.D.
588                     ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

                                   6.3. Slow Convergence
  A crucial assumption for our main result (Theorem 3.1) is that the supporting line L(x)
of the response function r(x) must intersect the y-axis at a positive value. If this is not the
case, the corresponding imitation dynamic is not well-deﬁned. In this section, we ask,
given a monotone increasing response function r(·), when does fast convergence fail to
hold for a given target q? A natural candidate would be any value of q such that r(q) < q,
for then the adoption process gets caught in a bottleneck. In particular, this situation
arises when r is convex-concave and is too sharply bowed in the convex part (see Figure 3
for an example). Proposition 6.2 shows, however, that this is not a sufﬁcient condition:
star networks exhibit fast convergence for any value q < r(1). In this section, we show
that the condition r(q) < q does lead to slow convergence for large regular networks; in
particular, the expected waiting time to reach such a target q grows exponentially with the
degree of the network.

   PROPOSITION 6.5: Let Rm be a sequence of undirected dm -regular networks, and let the
response function be monotone increasing with r(q) < q. There exists a constant c > 0 (inde-
                                    cdm
pendent of m) such that Tq (Rm ) ≥ e m .

  PROOF IDEA: Instead of considering the ﬁrst time τ when the fraction of adopting
agents reaches a threshold q, we study the ﬁrst time τ̃ where there exists an agent in
the network who has a fraction of at least q adopting neighbors. (The regularity of the
network implies that τ̃ ≤ τ.)
  We rely on the fact that prior to time τ̃, all updating agents in all periods revise their
action to 1 with probability at most r(q). (This follows from the monotonicity of r.) From
the perspective of a single player, his neighbors update their actions in an i.i.d. manner
with probability of success c ≤ r(q). We can therefore deduce (using Lemma 1 in Benaim
and Weibull (2003)) that the expected waiting time ro reach a fraction q of adopters in a
                                                     cdm
dm -regular network with m agents is bounded by e m for some constant c > 0.         Q.E.D.

  Proposition 6.5 does not hold for regular networks of ﬁxed degree d. To see this, note
that for every constant d, the union of d+1m
                                              cliques of size d + 1 has the fast-convergence
property. Since the mixing time T of a single clique of size d + 1 is constant, after time T
we will obtain a large number of cliques whose conﬁgurations are distributed according
to the invariant distribution, and this fraction will be very close to the expected fraction
under the invariant distribution (i.e., a high fraction of adopters).

                                      7. CONCLUSION
   In this paper, we have established an upper bound on the expected waiting time until
an innovation is adopted by a large fraction of a given population. The formula for the
bound is universal in the sense that it holds for all directed and undirected networks of
arbitrary size and degree distribution. Moreover, the bound holds when the network itself
is evolving over time. Previous results on this topic rely on the existence of a potential
function and hold only for regular networks with symmetric interactions, as in Kreindler
and Young (2014). We have also established waiting time bounds for the diffusion of
multiple innovations instead of just a single innovation, which is the usual case treated in
the literature.
   Our bound holds for a wide variety of perturbed best response processes where agents
choose optimal responses under random payoff shocks. Particular cases include errors
                             THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                       589

that are normally or extreme-value distributed, for example. These models are consistent
with empirical evidence on subjects’ learning behavior in network games (Mäs and Nax
(2016)). The formula for the bound is expressed in terms of the slope and intercept of
a suitably chosen ‘linearization’ of the perturbed response process. In particular, the ex-
pected waiting time to reach a given proportion of adopters is inversely proportional to
the initial amount of ‘noise’ in the linear process when no one has yet adopted (L(0) in
expression (3)).
   Given more information on the topological structure of the network, one can obtain
signiﬁcantly tighter bounds on the expected waiting time, as we showed in Section 6. The
usefulness of our main result arises from the fact that in practice it is very difﬁcult to
observe the topology of interactions and the degree of inﬂuence that different actors exert
on one another. By contrast, it may be possible to estimate the response probabilities of
agents conditional on the choices of their neighbors using longitudinal data. From this,
one can derive the linearized process and the upper bound on the expected waiting time
to reach a given adoption threshold.

                     APPENDIX A: FEIGE’S INEQUALITY AND LEMMA 1
  The following theorem is due to Feige (2006).

  THEOREM A.1: Let X1               X n be nonnegative independent random variables, with
                                 n
E[Xi ] ≤ 1 ∀i, and let X =       i=1Xi . Then for any n,

                                       P X < E[X] + 1 ≥ γ > 0

for some γ ≥ 1/13.

  Garnett (2020) improved upon the constant γ and show that γ ≥ 0 14. We next prove
Lemma 1 from the above theorem.16

  PROOF OF LEMMA 1: Let c1          c k be i.i.d. Bernoulli(p), and let 1        k be positive
real numbers. We can assume without loss of generality that i ≤ 1−p     1
                                                                          for all i ∈ [k], and
that 1 = 1/(1 − p). Let Xi = i (1 − ci ) mi = i (1 − p) X = X2 + · · · + Xk , and m =
m2 + · · · + mk . We must show that P( i∈[k] i ci ≥ i∈[k] i p) = P(X1 + X ≤ m + 1) ≥ γp.
Indeed, by the above theorem,

                     P(X1 + X ≤ m + 1) ≥ P(X1 = 0)P(X < m + 1) ≥ γp                              Q.E.D.

  A related result due to Billingsley ((2008), Theorem 9.2) says the following.
                                                                                         4
  THEOREM: If E(Z) = 0, E(Z 2 ) = s2 , and E(Z 4 ) = ξ4 , then P(Z ≥ 0) ≥ 4sξ4 .

  To apply this in our setting, let c1 c k be i.i.d. Bernoulli(p) and let 1     k ≥ 0.
          k                                          k          k
Let Z = i=1 i (ci − p). Note that P(Z ≥ 0) = P( i=1 i ci ≥ ( i=1 i )p). The preceding

  16
     The proof of Lemma 1 was ﬁrst communicated to us by Terence Tao (see https://mathoverﬂow.net/
questions/278117/convex-combination-iid-bernoulli-random-variables). We thank Yuval Peres for pointing out
to us the result by Feige (2006).
590                          ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

theorem shows that
                                                                             2
                                                                   k

                                                  p(1 − p)               2
                                                                         i
                                                                   i=1
                   P(Z ≥ 0) ≥                           k

                                    4   1 − 3p + 3p2          4
                                                              i   + 3p(1 − p)              2
                                                                                           i
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                j
                                                       i=1                       i j:i=j


For values of p that are close to 12 , Billingsley’s inequality provides a better bound than the
one by Feige and Garnett. However, for p close to 1 the right-hand side is close to zero
whereas the corollary to Feige’s lemma shows that P(Z ≥ 0) ≥ 0 14p. For certain values
of p, the bound of Theorem 3.1 can be further improved. Concretely, a result by Garnett
                                                                                    2 ) } for p ≥ 2 .
                                                                             p(1−p)
(2020, Theorem 1.2), can be applied to establish the bound min{ 16 2(1−3p+3p                      1

This bound is slightly better than 0 14 for p < 0 835. To see this let X = i i (p − ci ).
By Garnett’s theorem P(X < 0) ≥ 2c1 provided E(X 4 ) ≤ c[E(X 2 )]2 and E(X 3 ) ≥ 0. The
                                         4             2                                        4
latter holds for p ≥ 12 . Now [E(X 2 )]2 = λ p(1−p) +(1−λ)3 where λ = (
                               E(X )        1−3p+3p                                        i    i
                                                                                               2 )2   . Hence we may
                                                                                           i   i
                      (1−3p+3p2 )
take c = max{3 p(1−p) } from which the bound follows.17 Since we prefer not to limit
the range of p, however, the Feige–Garnett inequality is more useful for our purposes.

                      APPENDIX B: PROOFS OF PROPOSITIONS 6.3 AND 6.5
  PROPOSITION 6.3: Let Rm be a regular network with m agents. For every 0 < q < q < p,
there exists a constant c = c(q q ) > 1 (independent of m) such that Iq q (Rm ) ≥ c m .

   PROOF OF PROPOSITION 6.3: As in the proof of Theorem 3.1, we analyze the discrete-
time linear dynamic. Recall that 1 − α = L(1) − L(0), and that s(t) represents the imita-
tion dynamic: with probability α the updating agent tosses a coin with success probability
p, and with probability 1 − α he imitates a random neighbor.
   If we prove that the expected time to reach the fraction q under the discrete-time
dynamic is at least ĉ m for some cˆ > 1, then the original dynamic satisﬁes the exponential
bound ĉ m /m. (The factor m is a result of changing from discrete to continuous time.)
Note that for all sufﬁciently small 1 < c < ĉ we have ĉ m /m ≥ c m , hence the exponential
lower bound on the discrete-time dynamic provides an exponential lower bound on the
original dynamic.
   Given s(t) ∈ {0 1}m , let z(t) = i si (t) ∈ N be the number of adopters. We denote by
d(t) = |{[i j] ∈ E : si (t) = 0 s j (t) = 1}|/|E| ∈ [0 1] the fraction of “disagreement” edges
in the graph, where the agents are playing opposite actions.
   The process z(t) is a random walk with z(t + 1) − z(t) ∈ {−1 0 1}. We shall provide
an explicit formula for the probability that z(t) moves to the left, to the right, or stays
put. Given s(t) one agent is drawn at random in period t + 1. The probability is α that
this agent tosses a coin. Conditional on the coin toss, the agent switches from 0 to 1 with
probability (1 − z(t)/m)p. (The ﬁrst term is the probability that he was initially choosing
0, and the second term is the probability that he updates to 1). With probability 1 − α, the
agent imitates. Let d(t) be the number of edges {i j} where the actions of agents i and j

  17
       We thank an anonymous referee for pointing this out.
                           THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                 591

are different. Then

              P z(t + 1) − z(t) = 1|s(t) = α 1 − z(t)/m p + (1 − α)d(t)/2                   (17)

Similarly, we deduce that

            P z(t + 1) − z(t) = −1|s(t) = α z(t)/m (1 − p) + (1 − α)d(t)/2                  (18)

  For z(t) ∈ [mq mq], the ratio between moving left and right can be bounded by

                         P z(t + 1) − z(t) = −1|s(t)
                          P z(t + 1) − z(t) = 1|s(t)
                                α z(t)/m (1 − p) + (1 − α)d(t)/2
                            =
                                α 1 − z(t)/m p + (1 − α)d(t)/2
                                αq(1 − p) + (1 − α)d(t)/2 αq + 1
                            ≤                            ≤
                                α(1 − q)p + (1 − α)d(t)/2 αp + 1

We denote this constant by = αp+1  αq+1
                                        < 1. Given s(t) with z(t) = mq − 1, we want to
estimate the probability that the process will reach the low value z = nq before it visits
z = nq. This question has a precise answer for any biased random walk with bias < 1
(see Feller (2008) Chapter XIV.2). Namely, if we let n = (q − q )m, the probability of
                       n−1 n
reaching z = mq is 1− −n , which is bounded above by n−1 . Therefore, the expected
time until our process reaches z(t) = q m is at least ( 1 )n−1 ≥ ĉ m for some sufﬁciently
small constant cˆ > 1.                                                             Q.E.D.

   PROPOSITION 6.5: Let Rm be a sequence of undirected dm -regular networks, and let the
response function be monotone increasing with r(q) < q. There exists a constant c > 0 (inde-
                                    cdm
pendent of m) such that Tq (Rm ) ≥ e m .

   PROOF OF PROPOSITION 6.5: Consider a dm -regular graph with m agents. Let τ :=
min{ m1 i si (t) ≥ q} be the ﬁrst time such that the fraction of adopters is at least q. Let
τ̃ be the ﬁrst time such that there exists an agent i with at least dm q neighbors who have
adopted. It follows from the regularity of the network that τ̃ ≤ τ. We shall bound E(τ)
from below by providing a lower bound for E(τ)     ˜ .
   It follows from the monotonicity of r that, prior to time τ̃, any agent that updates his
strategy chooses action 1 with probability at most r(q). Thus in order to bound E(τ)     ˜ from
below we can assume that, prior to τ̃, all agents choose action 1 with probability r(q).
Assume that at time t < τ̃ the fraction of i’s neighbors that have adopted lies weakly below
r(q)+q
   2
       . Consider the following two events: (a) at time t + 1 the fraction of i’s neighbors who
have adopted lies above r(q)+q
                             2
                                ; (b) there exists a time s ∈ [t t + 1] where the fraction of i’s
neighbors who have adopted exceeds q. It follows from Lemma 1 in Benaim and Weibull
(2003) that if all neighbors of i choose action 1 with probability r(q) at every revision
opportunity, then the probability that either (a) or (b) holds is at most e−cdm for some
constant c > 0.
   Now assume that the fraction of adopting neighbors of every agent i at time t < τ̃ lies
below r(q)2+q . Then the probability that there exists an agent i for which either (a) or (b)
592                         ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

holds is at most me−cdm . If neither (a) nor (b) holds for every agent at every time pe-
                                                         cdm
riod t = 0   n , then τ˜ > n + 1. It follows that E(τ)
                                                    ˜ ≥ e m . This concludes the proof of
Proposition 6.5.                                                                  Q.E.D.

                                               REFERENCES
ACEMOGLU, D., M. Z. DAHLEH, I. LOBEL, AND A. OZDAGLAR (2011): “Bayesian Learning in Social Net-
  works,” Review of Economic Studies, 78, 1201–1236. [571]
ARIELI, I., AND H. P. YOUNG (2016): “Stochastic Learning Dynamics and Speed of Convergence in Population
  Games,” Econometrica, 84, 627–676. [570]
BALA, V., AND S. GOYAL (1998): “Learning From Neighbours,” Review of Economic Studies, 65 (3), 595–621.
  [571]
BANERJEE, A. (1992): “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 797–817.
  [571]
BANERJEE, A., A. G. CHANDRASEKHAR, E. DUFLO, AND M. O. JACKSON (2013): “The Diffusion of Microﬁ-
  nance,” Science, 341 (6144). [570]
BENAIM, M. (1998): “Recursive Algorithms, Urn Processes and Chaining Number of Chain Recurrent Sets,”
  Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems, 18 (1), 53–87. [584]
BENAIM, M., AND J. W. WEIBULL (2003): “Deterministic Approximation of Stochastic Evolution in Games,”
  Econometrica, 71 (3), 873–903. [588,591]
BIKHCHANDANI, J. S., D. HIRSCHLEIFER, AND I. WELCH (1992): “A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and
  Cultural Change as Information Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, 992–1026. [571]
BILLINGSLEY, P. (2008): Probability and Measure. John Wiley & Sons. [578,589]
BLUME, L. E. (1993): “The Statistical-Mechanics of Strategic Interactions,” Games and Economic Behavior, 5,
  387–424. [571]
BONGAARTS, J., AND S. C. WATKINS (1996): “Social Interactions and Contemporary Fertility Transitions,”
  Population and Development Review, 22 (4), 639–682. [571]
BRIAN, A. W. (1994): Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the Economy. Ann Arbor, MI: Univ. of Michi-
  gan Press. [571]
BURKE, M. A., G. M. FOURNIER, AND K. PRASAD (2007): “The Diffusion of a Medical Innovation: Is Success
  in the Stars?” Southern Economic Journal, 73, 588–603. [571]
BURKE, M. A., G. M. FOURNIER, AND L. PRASAD (2010): “Geographic Variations in a Model of Physician
  Reatment Choice With Social Interactions,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 73, 418–432.
  [571]
CENTOLA, D., AND A. BARONCHELLI (2015): “The Spontaneous Emergence of Conventions: An Experimental
  Study,” PNAS, 112 (7), 1989–1994. [570]
CHANDRA, A., AND D. STAIGER (2007): “Productivity Spillovers in Health Care: Evidence From the Treatment
  of Heart Attacks,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 103–140. [571]
COLEMAN, J., E. KATZ, AND H. MENZEL (1957): “The Diffusion of an Innovation Among Physicians,” Sociom-
  etry, 20, 253–270. [570]
DAVID, P. A. (1985): “Clio and the Economics of QWERTY,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceed-
  ings, 75, 332–337. [571]
ELLISON, G. (1993): “Learning, Social Interaction, and Coordination,” Econometrica, 61, 1047–1071. [570]
ELLISON, G., AND D. FUDENBERG (1993): “Rules of Thumb for Social Learning,” Journal of Political Economy,
  101, 612–643. [571]
ELLISON, G., D. FUDENBERG, AND L. IMHOF (2016): “Fast Convergence in Evolutionary Models: A Lyapunov
  Approach,” Journal of Economic Theorey, 161, 1–36. [570]
FEIGE, U. (2006): “On Sums of Independent Random Variables With Unbounded Variance, and Estimating
  the Average Degree in a Graph,” Siam Journal on Computing, 35 (4), 964–984. [572,578,589]
FELLER, W. (2008): An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Vol. 1. John Wiley & Sons. [591]
FOSTER, A., AND M. ROSENZWEIG (1995): “Learning by Doing and Learning From Others: Human Capital
  and Technical Change in Agriculture,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 1176–1209. [570]
          (2010): “Microeconomics of Technology Adoption,” Annual Review of Economic, 2 (1), 395–424. [570]
GALE, D., AND S. KARIV (2003): “Bayesian Learning in Social Networks,” Games and Economic Behavior, 45,
  329–346. [571]
GARNETT, B. (2020): “Small Deviations of Sums of Independent Random Variables,” Journal of Combinatorial
  Theory, Series A, 169, 105119. [572,578,589,590]
                               THE SPEED OF INNOVATION DIFFUSION                                          593

GOLUB, B., AND M. O. JACKSON (2010): “Naive Learning in Social Networks and the Wisdom of Crowds,”
  American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 2, 112–149. [571]
           (2012): “How Homophily Affects the Speed of Learning and Best-Response Dynamics,” Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 1287 (1338). [571]
GRILICHES, Z. (1957): “Hybrid Corn: An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change,” Economet-
  rica, 25, 501–522. [570]
JACKSON, M. O. (2008): Social and Economic Networks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. [571]
JACKSON, M. O., AND A. WATTS (2002): “The Evolution of Social and Economic Networks,” Journal of Eco-
  nomic Theory, 106, 265–295. [572]
JACKSON, M. O., AND L. YARIV (2007): “Diffusion of Behavior and Equilibrium Properties in Network
  Games,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 97, 92–98. [571]
KOHLER, H.-P. (1997): “Learning in Social Networks and Contraceptive Choice,” Demography, 34, 369–383.
  [570,571]
KOHLER, H.-P., J. R. BEHRMAN, AND S. C. WATKINS (2001): “The Density of Social Networks and Fertility
  Decisions: Evidence From South Nyanza District, Kenya,” Demography, 38, 43–58. [570,571]
KREINDLER, G. E., AND H. P. YOUNG (2013): “Fast Convergence in Evolutionary Equilibrium Selection,”
  Games and Economic Behavior, 80, 39–67. [571]
           (2014): “Rapid Innovation Diffusion in Social Networks,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
  Sciences, 111, 10881–10888. [569-572,575,588]
LIGGETT, T. M. (1999): Stochastic Interacting Systems: Contact, Voter, and Exclusion Process. Berlin: Springer-
  Verlag. [578]
MÄS, M., AND H. H. NAX (2016): “A Behavioral Study of Noise in Coordination Games,” Journal of Economic
  Theory, 162, 195–208. [571,573,589]
MONTANARI, A., AND A. SABERI (2010): “The Spread of Innovations in Social Networks,” Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 107, 20196–20201. [570]
MONTGOMERY, M. R., AND J. B. CASTERLINE (1996): “Social Inﬂuence, Social Learning, and New Models of
  Fertility,” Population Development Review, 22, 151–175. [571]
MORRIS, S. (2000): “Contagion,” Review of Economic Studies, 67, 57–78. [570]
MOSSEL, E., A. SLY, AND O. TAMUZ (2015): “Strategic Learning and the Topology of Social Networks,” Econo-
  metrica, 83, 1755–1794. [571]
MOTWANI, R., AND P. RAGHAVAN (1995): Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge University Press. [586]
MUELLER-FRANK, M. (2013): “A General Framework for Rational Learning in Social Networks,” Theoretical
  Economics, 8 (1), 1–40. [571]
MUELLER-FRANK, M., AND M. PAI (2016): “Social Learning With Costly Search,” American Economic Journal:
  Microeconomics, 83 (109). [571]
MUNSHI, K., AND J. MYAUX (2006): “Social Norms and the Fertility Transition,” Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics, 80, 1–38. [570,571]
PHELPS, C. E., AND C. MOONEY (1993): “Variations in Medical Practice Use: Causes and Consequences,” in
  Competitive Approaches to Health Care Reform, ed. by R. J. Arnould, R. F. Rich, and W. White. Washington,
  DC: Urban Institute, 139–178. [571]
ROGERS, E. (2003): Diffusion of Innovations (Fifth Ed.). New York: Simon and Schuster. [570]
ROTH, G., AND W. H. SANDHOLM (2013): “Stochastic Approximations With Constant Step Size and Differen-
  tial Inclusions,” SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 51 (1), 525–555. [584,585]
RYAN, B., AND N. C. GROSS (1943): “The Diffusion of Hybrid Seed Corn in Two Iowa Communities,” Rural
  Sociology, 8, 15–24. [570]
SKYRMS, B., AND R. PEMANTLE (2000): “A Dynamic Model of Social Network Formation,” Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences of USA, 97, 9340–9346. [572]
SOLAN, E., D. ROSENBERG, AND N. VIEILLE (2009): “Informational Externalities and Emergence of Consen-
  sus,” Games and Economic Behavior, 66 (2), 979–994. [571]
UDRY, C., AND T. CONLEY (2001): “Social Learning Through Networks: The Adoption of New Agricultural
  Technologies in Ghana,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 83, 668–673. [570]
VALENTE, T. (1995): Network Models of the Diffusion of Innovations. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. [570]
           (2005): “Network Models and Methods for Studying the Diffusion of Innovations,” in Models and
  Methods in Social Network Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [570]
VEGA-REDONDO, F. (2007): Complex Social Networks. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. [571,572]
WATTS, D. (2002): “A Simple Model of Global Cascades on Random Networks,” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 99 (9), 5766–5771. [571]
WENNBERG, J., AND A. GITTELSOHN (1973): “Small Area Variations in Health Care Delivery,” Science, 182,
  1102–1108. [571]
594                         ARIELI, BABICHENKO, PERETZ, AND YOUNG

YOUNG, H. P. (1998): Individual Strategy and Social Structure: An Evolutionary Theory of Institutions. Princeton,
 NJ: Princeton University Press. [570]
        (2009): “Innovation Diffusion in Heterogeneous Populations: Contagion, Social Inﬂuence, and Social
 Learning,” American Economic Review, 99 (5), 1899–1924. [572]
         (2011): “The Dynamics of Social Innovation,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108
 (4), 21285–21291. [570]


                                 Co-editor Joel Sobel handled this manuscript.
Manuscript received 23 January, 2019; ﬁnal version accepted 13 November, 2019; available online 18 November,
                                                    2019.
