arXiv:1510.07322v1  [math.LO]  25 Oct 2015
A COMPUTABLE FUNCTOR FROM GRAPHS TO FIELDS
RUSSELL MILLER, BJORN POONEN, HANS SCHOUTENS, AND ALEXANDRA SHLAPENTOKH
Abstract. We construct a fully faithful functor from the category of graphs to the category
of ﬁelds. Using this functor, we resolve a longstanding open problem in computable model
theory, by showing that for every nontrivial countable structure S, there exists a countable
ﬁeld F with the same essential computable-model-theoretic properties as S. Along the way,
we develop a new “computable category theory”, and prove that our functor and its partially-
deﬁned inverse (restricted to the categories of countable graphs and countable ﬁelds) are
computable functors.
1. Introduction
1.A. A functor from graphs to ﬁelds. Let Graphs be the category of symmetric irreﬂex-
ive graphs in which morphisms are isomorphisms onto induced subgraphs (see Section 2.A).
Let Fields be the category of ﬁelds, with ﬁeld homomorphisms as the morphisms. Using
arithmetic geometry, we will prove the following:
Theorem 1.1. There exists a fully faithful functor F : Graphs →Fields.
(The deﬁnitions of “full” and “faithful” are reviewed in Section 2.B.) In particular, given a
graph G, the functor produces a ﬁeld with the same automorphism group as G.
1.B. Computable functors. For applications to computable model theory, we are inter-
ested in graphs and ﬁelds whose underlying set is ω := {0, 1, 2, . . .}. These form full subcat-
egories Graphsω and Fieldsω. The functor F of Theorem 1.1 will be constructed so that it
restricts to a functor Fω : Graphsω →Fieldsω. Let Eω denote the essential image of Fω
(see Section 2.B for deﬁnitions). Then we may view Fω as a functor from Graphsω to Eω.
We will also a deﬁne a functor Gω : Eω →Graphsω, and we would like to say that Fω and
Gω are computable and are inverse to each other in some computable way.
To guide us to the correct formulation of such statements, we create a new “type-2 com-
putable category theory”; see Section 3. The adjective “type-2”, borrowed from computable
analysis (see Remark 3.2), indicates that we work with noncomputable objects; indeed,
Graphsω and Fieldsω each contain uncountably many noncomputable objects.
The ef-
fectiveness in our deﬁnitions really arises in the concept of a computable functor, a functor
Date: October 25, 2015.
This project was initiated at a workshop held at the American Institute of Mathematics.
The ﬁrst author was partially supported by National Science Foundation grants DMS-1001306 and DMS-
1362206, and by PSC-CUNY Research Awards 67839-00 45 and 66582-00 44.
The second author was partially supported by National Science Foundation grant DMS-1069236 and a
grant from the Simons Foundation (340694 to Bjorn Poonen).
The fourth author was partially supported by National Science Foundation grant DMS-1161456.
Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the National Science Foundation or Simons Foundation.
1


in which the processes of transforming objects to objects and morphisms to morphisms are
given by Turing functionals: roughly speaking, each output should be computable given an
oracle for the input (see Deﬁnition 3.1). Our computable category theory includes also a
notion of computable isomorphism of functors (see Deﬁnition 3.3). Using this lexicon, we
can now state our main result on the computability of the functors:
Theorem 1.2.
(a) The functors Fω and Gω are computable in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.1.
(b) The composition GωFω is computably isomorphic to 1Graphsω, and FωGω is computably
isomorphic to 1Eω.
We may summarize Theorem 1.2 by saying that Fω and Gω give a computable equivalence
of categories between Graphsω and Eω (see Deﬁnition 3.4). In fact, we will deﬁne Gω so
that GωFω equals 1Graphsω, but computable isomorphism in place of equality here suﬃces
for the applications in Section 9.
Here is one concrete consequence of Theorem 1.2:
Corollary 1.3. If a ﬁeld F ∈Fieldsω is isomorphic to a ﬁeld in the image of Fω, then one
can compute from F a graph G ∈Graphsω and an isomorphism F →Fω(G).
Proof. Apply the isomorphism GωFω ≃1Graphsω of Theorem 1.2(b) to G := Gω(F).
□
Specializing Corollary 1.3 to the case in which F is computable yields the following:
Corollary 1.4. Every computable ﬁeld isomorphic to a ﬁeld in the image of Fω is com-
putably isomorphic to Fω(G) for some computable G ∈Graphsω.
Following [Kni86, §4], we call a structure automorphically trivial if there exists a ﬁnite subset
S0 of its domain S such that every permutation of S ﬁxing S0 pointwise is an automorphism.
Proposition 1.5. Let F ∈Eω; that is, F is isomorphic to a ﬁeld in the image of Fω. Let
I := {G ∈Graphsw : Fω(G) ≃F}, so I ̸= ∅.
(a) The set I is an isomorphism class in Graphsw.
(b) Either every graph in I is automorphically trivial and computable, or there exists a
graph in I of the same Turing degree as F.
Proofs of Theorem 1.2 and Proposition 1.5 appear in Section 7.
Remark 1.6. As will be explained in Section 3.C, there have been other attempts to give
eﬀective versions of category theory (and, more succesfully, to give a categorical underpinning
to computability theory). To our knowledge, however, ours is the ﬁrst attempt to deﬁne
eﬀectiveness for functors using type-2 Turing computation.
1.C. Computable model theory. One of the goals of computable model theory is to help
distinguish various classes of countable structures according to the algorithmic complexity
of those structures. The class of algebraically closed ﬁelds of characteristic 0, for example,
is viewed throughout model theory as a particularly simple class, and its computability-
theoretic properties conﬁrm this view: every countable algebraically closed ﬁeld can be
computably presented, all of them are relatively ∆0
2-categorical, and the only one that is not
relatively computably categorical has inﬁnite computable dimension. (All these terms are
deﬁned in Section 9.) In contrast, the theory of linear orders is a good deal more complex:
2


there do exist countable linear orders with no computable presentation, and linear orders with
much higher degrees of categoricity than 0′. In this view, the theory of graphs is even more
complicated: for example, every computable linear order has computable dimension either 1
or ω, whereas for computable (symmetric irreﬂexive) graphs all computable dimensions ≤ω
are known to occur.
We will discuss speciﬁc properties such as computable presentability and computable di-
mension when we come to prove results about them, in Section 9. For now, we simply note
that a substantial body of results has been established on the possibility of transferring these
properties from one class of countable structures to another. After much piecemeal work by
assorted authors, most of these results were gathered together and brought to completion
in the work [HKSS02], by Hirschfeldt, Khoussainov, Shore, and Slinko. There it was proven
that the class of symmetric irreﬂexive graphs is complete, in the very strong sense of their
Deﬁnition 1.21. The authors gave a coding procedure that, given any countable structure S
with domain ω (in an arbitrary computable language, with one quite trivial restriction) as its
input, produced a countable graph G on the same domain with the same computable-model-
theoretic properties as S. Several other natural properties have been introduced since then
(the automorphism spectrum, in [HMM10, Deﬁnition 1.1], and the categoricity spectrum, in
[FKM10, Deﬁnition 1.2], for example), and each of these has also turned out to be preserved
under the construction from [HKSS02]. The method they gave was quite robust, in this
sense, and one may expect that it will also be found to preserve other properties that are
yet to be deﬁned.
Having established the completeness of the class of countable graphs in this sense, the
authors went on to consider many other everyday classes of countable ﬁrst-order structures.
By doing a similar coding from graphs into other classes, they succeeded in proving the
completeness (in this same sense) of the following classes:
• countable directed graphs;
• countable partial orderings;
• countable lattices;
• countable rings (with zero-divisors);
• countable integral domains of arbitrary characteristic;
• countable commutative semigroups;
• countable 2-step nilpotent groups.
(We note again that in some cases, these results had been established in earlier work by other
authors. In certain of these cases, the language must be augmented by a ﬁnite number of
constant symbols.) On the other hand, various existing and subsequent results demonstrated
that none of the following classes is complete in this sense:
• countable linear orders (e.g., by results in [GD80, Theorem 2], [Rem81, Corollary 1],
and [Ric81, Theorem 3.3]);
• countable Boolean algebras (see [DJ94, Theorem 1], or use [Ric81, Theorem 3.1]);
• countable trees, either as partial orders or under the meet relation ∧(by [Ric81,
Theorem 3.4] or [LMMS05, Theorem 1.8]);
• algebraic ﬁeld extensions of Q or of Fp (see [Mil09, Corollary 5.5], for example);
• ﬁeld extensions of Q of ﬁnite transcendence degree (see [Mil09, §6]);
• countable archimedean ordered ﬁelds (by Theorem 3.3.1 in Levin’s thesis [Lev09]).
3


In addition, Goncharov announces in [Gon81] that every computable abelian group has
computable dimension 1 or ω, though it seems that a detailed proof does not exist in print.
This result would add the class of countable abelian groups to the list of non-complete classes.
Conspicuously absent from both of the lists above is the class of countable ﬁelds. The
question whether this class possesses the completeness property has remained open, despite
substantial interest since the publication of [HKSS02]: see the introduction to [LMMS05].
In this paper we resolve the question, using the computable functors of Section 1.B:
Theorem 1.7. The class of countable ﬁelds has the completeness property of [HKSS02, Def-
inition 1.21].
Proving the many speciﬁc aspects of this theorem will take most of Section 9. Our proof
of Theorem 1.7 shows more speciﬁcally that the class of countable ﬁelds of characteristic 0
has the completeness property.
Remark 1.8. The constructions in [HKSS02] too can be expressed in terms of our computable
category theory.
1.D. Structure of the paper. Section 2 introduces notation and deﬁnitions. Section 3
introduces the key deﬁnitions of our computable category theory, and discusses its relation
to other work in the literature.
Section 4 deﬁnes some algebraic curves used in Section 5 to construct F, and proves
arithmetic properties of these curves that are used in Section 6 to construct G and prove
enough properties of F and G to prove Theorem 1.1. Section 7 constructs the computable
analogues Fω and Gω, and proves Theorem 1.2. Section 8 is something of a side remark:
it proves that for every G ∈Graphsω, the ﬁeld Fω(G) is isomorphic to a subﬁeld of R;
but Fω cannot be viewed as a functor to the category of ordered ﬁelds if morphisms in the
latter are required to respect the orderings. Finally, Section 9 explains the implications of
our functors for computable model theory. Many of the results there follow formally from
[HKSS02, Theorem 3.1] and Theorem 1.2, so they could be stated more generally in terms of
any computable equivalence of categories of structures, but for concreteness, we state them
speciﬁcally for the categories of graphs and ﬁelds.
2. Notation and definitions
2.A. Graphs. Given a set I, let
 I
2

be the set of 2-element subsets of I. A (symmetric,
irreﬂexive) graph is a set V equipped with a subset E ⊆
 V
2

; then {(i, j) ∈V ×V : {i, j} ∈E}
is a symmetric irreﬂexive relation on V . If G is a graph (V, E), then #G := #V ; call G ﬁnite
if V is ﬁnite. Deﬁne a morphism of graphs (V, E) →(V ′, E′) to be an injection f : V ֒→V ′
such that for each {i, j} ∈
 V
2

, we have {i, j} ∈E if and only if {f(i), f(j)} ∈E′. In
other words, a morphism of graphs (V, E) →(V ′, E′) is an isomorphism from (V, E) onto an
induced subgraph of (V ′, E′). These notions deﬁne a category Graphs.
2.B. Category theory. A full subcategory of a category C is a category consisting of some
the objects of C but all of the morphisms between pairs of these chosen objects. Let F : C →
D be a functor. Then F is full (respectively, faithful) if for any two objects C1, C2 ∈C,
the map Hom(C1, C2) →Hom(F(C1), F(C2)) is surjective (respectively, injective). The
essential image of F is the full subcategory of D consisting of objects D ∈D that are
isomorphic to F(C) for some C ∈C.
4


2.C. Fields and arithmetic geometry. Let Fields be the category of ﬁelds, with ﬁeld
homomorphisms as the morphisms. If X is a k-variety, and L ⊇k is a ﬁeld extension, let XL
denote the base extension; concretely, XL is the L-variety deﬁned by the same equations as
X, but with coeﬃcients considered to be in L. A k-variety is integral if it is irreducible and
the ring of functions on any Zariski open subset has no nilpotent elements. A k-variety is
geometrically integral if it remains integral after any extension of the ground ﬁeld; for example,
the aﬃne curve x2 −2y2 = 0 over Q is integral but not geometrically integral. If X is an
integral k-variety, let k(X) denote its function ﬁeld. If (Xi)i∈I is a collection of geometrically
integral k-varieties indexed by a set I, let k(Q Xi) denote the direct limit of the function
ﬁelds k(Q
i∈J Xi) over all ﬁnite subsets J ⊆I. If X is a geometrically integral curve, let
gX ∈Z≥0 be its geometric genus, deﬁned as the dimension of the space of global 1-forms on
the regular projective model of X.
2.D. Computable model theory. Given a structure M, let dom(M) be its domain (un-
derlying set), and let ∆(M) be its atomic diagram (the set of atomic sentences true in M).
If M is a countable structure with dom(M) = ω, let deg M be the Turing degree of ∆(M),
and deﬁne the spectrum of M as Spec M := {deg N : N ≃M and dom(N) = ω}. Given
two such structures M and N, we say that M is computable from N, or write M ≤T N, if
∆(M) is computable under a ∆(N)-oracle, or equivalently deg M ≤T deg N.
3. Computable category theory
3.A. Computable functors. By a category of structures on ω, we mean a subcategory
C of the category of all ﬁrst-order L-structures with domain ω := {0, 1, 2, . . .}, for some
computable language L. (In some cases, one might allow also ﬁnite subsets of ω as domains.)
Here are two examples:
• Let Graphsω be the category whose objects are the (symmetric irreﬂexive) graphs
having underlying set ω, and whose morphisms are isomorphisms onto induced sub-
graphs.
• Let Fieldsω be the category whose objects are the ﬁelds having underlying set ω,
and whose morphisms are ﬁeld homomorphisms.
There is nothing particularly eﬀective about these categories. The requirement that the
domain equal ω gives us the opportunity to consider computability questions about the
structures in a category, but a graph G on ω with a noncomputable edge relation would be
an object of Graphsω in perfectly good standing. Also, even for computable sets E ⊆ω2,
there is no general way to determine whether E actually is the edge relation of a symmetric
irreﬂexive graph.
Eﬀectiveness considerations arise when we consider functors between these categories. A
functor maps objects to objects and morphisms to morphisms, and we would like this process
to be eﬀective.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Let C and C′ be categories of structures on ω (with respect to possibly
diﬀerent languages L and L′). A computable functor is a functor F : C →C′ for which there
exist Turing functionals Φ and Ψ such that
(i) for every S ∈C, the function ΦS computes (the atomic diagram of) the structure F(S);
and
(ii) for every morphism g : S →T in C, we have ΨS⊕g⊕T = F(g) in C′.
5


Computing the atomic diagram of F(S) is equivalent to computing every function and
relation from L′ on F(S) (and, in case L′ is inﬁnite, doing so uniformly and also computing
the value of each constant symbol). One could state (i) by saying that, for every n ∈ω,
the function ΦS(⟨n, ⃗x⟩) is the value on input ⃗x of the nth symbol of the language L′, as
interpreted in F(S). For relation symbols, this value is Boolean, while for constants and
function symbols, it is an element of F(S), i.e., a natural number. Condition (ii) states that
ΨS⊕g⊕T computes the morphism F(g) in C′, viewed as a map from dom(S) into dom(T).
Note that one is allowed to use the objects S and T, in addition to the morphism g between
them, to compute F(g); this is natural if one thinks of the source and target as being part
of the data describing a function. Our proofs in Section 7 that Fω and Gω are computable
also illustrate why including S and T is appropriate.
Remark 3.2. Our computable functors may also be called type-2 computable functors. The
terminology “type-2” comes from computable analysis, where this concept of computability
is common; the book [PER89] is a standard reference for this topic. Computable analysis
considers real numbers, given by fast-converging Cauchy sequences of rationals. Two such
sequences may well represent the same real number, and equality of real numbers is not
computable; that is, no Turing functional Φ has the property that, for all fast-converging
Cauchy sequences f and g with respective limits x and y in R,
Φf⊕g(0) =
(
1,
if x = y;
0,
if x ̸= y;
cf. [PER89, p. 23, Fact 3]. On the other hand, there does exist a Turing functional Ψ such
that, for all such f and g, Ψf⊕g is itself a fast-converging Cauchy sequence with limit x + y,
so addition is a type-2 computable function on R, as are the other arithmetic operations and
many more standard functions on R. Likewise, here in category theory, we are computing
functions not between natural numbers, but between subsets of natural numbers. This is
clear in the case of the edge relation on a graph, but in fact all countable structures (in
countable ﬁrst-order languages) turn out to be represented by subsets of ω, just as all real
numbers are.
3.B. Computable morphisms of functors.
Deﬁnition 3.3. Let F1, F2 : C →C′ be computable functors. A computable morphism of
functors (or computable natural transformation) from F1 to F2 is a morphism of functors
τ : F1 →F2 such that there exists a Turing functional that on input S ∈C computes the
morphism τ(S): F1(S) →F2(S).
This notion leads in the usual way to the notion of computable isomorphism of functors: this
is a computable morphism of functors having a two-sided inverse that is again a computable
morphism of functors. Then, adapting the deﬁnition of equivalence of categories leads to the
following.
Deﬁnition 3.4. Let C and C′ be categories of structures on ω. A computable equivalence
of categories from C to C′ is a pair of computable functors F : C →C′ and G : C′ →C
together with computable isomorphisms G F →1C and FG →1C′.
In Deﬁnition 3.4, we may refer to F alone as a computable equivalence of categories if
the other functors and isomorphisms exist.
6


3.C. Related work. To a certain extent, the concept of computable functor has appeared
before in computable model theory. Turing-computable reducibility (as deﬁned, e.g., in [KMVB07,
§1], by Knight, Miller, and Vanden Boom) can be viewed as a version of it. In that deﬁnition,
one class C of computable structures is Turing-computably reducible (or TC-reducible) to
another such class D if there exists a Turing functional Φ that accepts as input the atomic
diagram ∆(S) of a structure S ∈C and outputs the atomic diagram Φ∆(S) = ∆(T) of a
structure T ∈D. Writing F(S) for T, the further requirement is that S ∼= S′ if and only if
F(S) ∼= F(S′). So this deﬁnition essentially includes the ﬁrst half of Deﬁnition 3.1 above,
although stated only for computable structures, not for arbitrary structures with domain ω.
The second half is related to the preservation of the isomorphism relation, but here Deﬁni-
tion 3.1 is far stronger, requiring the actual computation of an isomorphism F(g) from F(S)
onto F(S′), given an isomorphism g from S onto S′. It would be reasonable to investigate
Deﬁnition 3.1 more fully, especially in light of the work in [KMVB07].
In parallel with our research into functors from graphs to ﬁelds, Montalbán examined a
notion that he calls eﬀective interpretation. This is detailed in [Mon14, §5], and is very much
in the vein of the traditional model-theoretic notion of interpretation, with eﬀectiveness
conditions added. The functor we build in Section 5 will allow an eﬀective interpretation of
each graph G in the ﬁeld F(G), since the domain of each graph will be deﬁnable uniformly
by an existential formula in the corresponding ﬁeld and the edge relation of the graph will
likewise be uniformly existentially deﬁnable on that domain within that ﬁeld. Indeed, F will
have a computable left-inverse functor, and it will actually be the case that F(G) always
has an eﬀective interpretation in G, although this is not so obvious at ﬁrst glance. These
are examples of a more general result, obtained in [HTMMM15, Theorems 5 and 12] by
Harrison-Trainor, Melnikov, Miller, and Montalbán in the wake of the present work, that
the existence of a computable functor from C to C′ is equivalent to the uniform eﬀective
interpretability of all elements of the class C′ in the class C. (So the eﬀective interpretation
of G in F(G) is an outgrowth of the computable left inverse functor for F, not of F itself.)
The results in [HKSS02] are proven largely by the construction of computable functors, al-
though not described in that way. However, one could also ask the same questions about cat-
egories known not to be complete. For example, there is a natural construction of a Boolean
algebra F(L) from a linear order L, simply by taking the interval algebra of L, where the
morphisms in each category are simply homomorphisms of the structures. On its face, this
functor appears to be neither full nor faithful, based on known results, and it does not have
a precise computable inverse functor on its image, although it may come close to doing so. It
cannot have all of these properties, because there does exist a linear order whose spectrum
is not realized by any Boolean algebra, as shown by Jockusch and Soare in [JS91, Theo-
rem 1]. (Here we use a generalization of the result in this article, namely, that a computable
equivalence of categories onto a strictly full subcategory allows one to transfer spectra from
objects of the ﬁrst category to objects of the second. This generalization appears to have
a straightforward direct proof, and in any case it follows from eﬀective bi-interpretability,
hence from [HTMMM15, Theorem 12], using [Mon14, Lemma 5.3].) We suspect that similar
results distinguishing the properties of various everyday classes of countable structures may
yield further insights into eﬀectiveness, fullness, faithfulness, and other properties of functors
among these classes, especially the incomplete ones listed in Section 1.C.
7


4. Curves
Deﬁne polynomials
p(u, v) := u4 + 16uv3 + 10v4 + 16v −4 ∈Q[u, v], and
q(T, x, y) := x4 + y4 + 1 + T(x4 + xy3 + y + 1) ∈Q[T, x, y].
Let X be the aﬃne plane curve p(u, v) = 0 over Q. For any ﬁeld F and t ∈F, let Yt be the
aﬃne plane curve q(t, x, y) = 0 over F. If we take F = Q(T) (the ﬁeld of rational functions
in one indeterminate) and t = T, then we obtain a curve YT over Q(T); let Y = YT. More
generally, if F ⊇Q and t is transcendental over Q, then Yt is the base change of Y by the
ﬁeld homomorphism Q(T) →F sending T to t, so Yt inherits many properties from Y .
The properties we need of these curves to construct the functor F are contained in parts
(1)–(7) of the following lemma. Later, to prove that for every G ∈Graphsω the ﬁeld F(G)
is isomorphic to a subﬁeld of R, we will also need (8).
Lemma 4.1.
(1) Both X and Y are geometrically integral.
(2) We have gX = gY > 1.
(3) Even after base ﬁeld extension, X and Y have no nontrivial birational automorphisms.
(4) Even after base ﬁeld extension, there is no birational map from Y to any curve deﬁnable
over a ﬁnite extension of Q.
(5) We have X(Q) = ∅.
(6) We have u(X(R)) = R.
(7) There exists an open neighborhood U of 0 in R such that for each t ∈U we have Yt(R) =
∅.
(8) If t ∈[20, ∞), then Yt has a real point with x-coordinate in [1, 2].
Proof. The projective closure eX of X specializes under reduction modulo 5 to the curve
e
X5 : u4 + uv3 + vw3 + w4 = 0
in P2
F5. The projective closure of Y specializes at T = 0 and T = ∞to the curves
eY0 : x4 + y4 + z4 = 0
and
eY∞: x4 + xy3 + yz3 + z4 = 0
in P2
Q, respectively. By [Poo05, Case I with n = 2, d = 4, c = 1], e
X5 and eY∞are smooth,
projective, geometrically integral plane curves of genus 3 with no nontrivial birational au-
tomorphisms even after base extension. It follows that X and Y have the same properties,
except for being projective.
(1) Explained above.
(2) By the above, gX = gY = 3.
(3) Explained above.
(4) If there were such a birational map, then the specializations eY0 and eY∞would be isomor-
phic over Q. But the former has a nontrivial automorphism (x, y, z) 7→(−x, y, z).
(5) The given model of e
X (viewed over Z) reduces modulo 8 to u4 + 2v4 + 4w4 = 0, which
has no solutions in P2(Z/8Z). Now X(Q) ֒→e
X(Q) = e
X(Z) →e
X(Z/8Z) = ∅.
8


(6) Fix u ∈R. Then limv→+∞p(u, v) = +∞, so by the intermediate value theorem it suﬃces
to ﬁnd v ∈R such that p(u, v) < 0. If |u| <
√
2, then v = 0 works. If |u| ≥
√
2, then
p(u, −u) = −5u4 −16u −4 < 0 by calculus.
(7) This follows from eY0(R) = ∅and compactness.
(8) Suppose that t ≥20 and x ∈[1, 2]. Then q(t, x, −3) ≤24+34+1+20(24−27−3+1) < 0
but q(t, x, 0) > 0, so there exists y ∈R with q(t, x, y) = 0.
□
5. Construction of the functor
5.A. Construction. We now deﬁne a functor F : Graphs →Fields. Suppose that we are
given a graph G = (V, E). Let K = Q(Q
i∈V X). Let ui, vi ∈K correspond to the rational
functions u, v on the ith copy of X. Thus (ui)i∈V is a transcendence basis for K/Q. For
{i, j} ∈
 V
2

, deﬁne the K-curve Z{i,j} as Yuiuj if {i, j} ∈E, and Yui+uj if {i, j} /∈E. Deﬁne
F(G) := K(Q Z{i,j}), where the product is over {i, j} ∈
 V
2

. A morphism G →G′ induces
an obvious ﬁeld homomorphism F(G) →F(G′). We obtain a functor F.
Remark 5.1. If G is ﬁnite, then #F(G) = ℵ0. If G is inﬁnite, then #F(G) = #G.
5.B. Properties. Here we prove properties of F(G) that will enable us to recover G from
F(G), or more precisely, to prove that F is fully faithful. In the proofs in this section,
labels like (2) refer to the parts of Lemma 4.1.
Lemma 5.2. Fix G. Let L be any ﬁeld extension of K. Consider the base changes to L of
X and all the curves Yuiuj and Yui+uj. The only nonconstant rational maps between these
curves over L are the identity maps from one of them to itself.
Proof. By (2), all the curves have the same genus. By (3) and Lemma A.2, it suﬃces to show
that no two distinct curves in this list are birational even after base ﬁeld extension. By (4),
this is already true for X and Yt for any transcendental t. If t, t′ are algebraically independent
over Q, and Yt and Yt′ become birational after base ﬁeld extension, then we can specialize
t′ to an element of Q while leaving t transcendental, contradicting (4). The previous two
sentences apply in particular to any t and t′ taken from the uiuj and the ui + uj.
□
Lemma 5.3. Let G = (V, E) be a graph. Let xij, yij ∈F(G) correspond to the rational
functions x, y on Z{i,j}.
(i) We have X(F(G)) = {(ui, vi) : i ∈V }.
(ii) If {i, j} ∈E, then Yuiuj(F(G)) = {(xij, yij)} and Yui+uj(F(G)) = ∅.
(iii) If {i, j} /∈E, then Yuiuj(F(G)) = ∅and Yui+uj(F(G)) = {(xij, yij)}.
Proof.
(i) By deﬁnition, F(G) is the direct limit of K(Z), where Z ranges over ﬁnite products
of the Z{i,j}. Thus, by Lemma A.1, each point in X(F(G)) corresponds to a rational
map from some Z to the base change XK. By Lemmas A.3 and 5.2 every such rational
map is constant. In other words, X(F(G)) = X(K).
Similarly, by Lemma A.1, each point in X(K) corresponds to a rational map from
some ﬁnite power of X to X. By (5), the rational map is nonconstant. By Lemmas A.3
and 5.2 it is the ith projection for some i. The corresponding point in X(K) is (ui, vi).
9


(ii) Suppose that {i, j} ∈E. The same argument as for (i) shows that Yuiuj(F(G)) =
Yuiuj(K)∪{(xij, yij)}, the last point coming from the identity Z{i,j} →Yuiuj. By (6), we
may embed K in R so that the ui are mapped to algebraically independent real numbers
so close to zero that Yuiuj(R) = ∅by (7). Thus Yuiuj(K) = ∅. So Yuiuj(F(G)) =
{(xij, yij)}.
The argument for Yui+uj(F(G)) = ∅is the same, except now that Z{i,j} is not
birational to Yuiuj.
(iii) The argument is the same as for (ii).
□
6. Construction of the inverse functor
6.A. Construction. Let E be the essential image of F. We may view F as a functor
Graphs →E. We now construct an essential inverse G : E →Graphs of F.
Suppose that F is an object of E. Deﬁne V := X(F). For i ∈V = X(F), let ui be
the ﬁrst coordinate of i. For {i, j} ∈
 V
2

, Lemma 5.3(ii,iii) shows that exactly one of Yuiuj
and Yui+uj has an F-point. Let E be the set of {i, j} ∈
 V
2

for which it is Yuiuj that has a
F-point. Let G (F) be the graph (V, E).
Suppose that f : F →F ′ is a morphism of E. We want to deﬁne a morphism of graphs
g : G (F) →G (F ′). On vertices, g is the map X(F) →X(F ′) induced by f. If {i, j} is
an edge of G (F), then Yuiuj has an F-point, and applying f shows that Yf(ui)f(uj) has an
F ′-point, so {g(i), g(j)} is an edge of G (F ′). If {i, j} is not an edge of G (F), then the
analogous argument using Yui+uj shows that {g(i), g(j)} is not an edge of G (F ′). Thus g is
a morphism of graphs. Deﬁne G (f) := g. This completes the speciﬁcation of a functor G .
6.B. Properties. For each graph G, let ǫG : G →X(F(G)) = G (F(G)) be the map sending
i to (ui, vi).
Proposition 6.1. We have G F ≃1Graphs.
Proof. By Lemma 5.3, ǫG is a bijection, and in fact a graph isomorphism since the following
are equivalent for a pair {i, j}:
• {i, j} is an edge of G;
• Yuiuj(F(G)) ̸= ∅;
• There is an edge between the vertices (ui, vi) and (uj, vj) of G (F(G)).
The isomorphism ǫG varies functorially with G.
□
Proposition 6.2. The functor G is faithful.
Proof. We must show how to recover a morphism f : F →F ′ in E given F, F ′, and G (f).
Without loss of generality, replace F by an isomorphic ﬁeld to assume that F = F(G), which
is generated by elements ui, vi, xij, yij. Since G (f) is the map X(F) →X(F ′) induced by
f, we recover f(ui) and f(vi) for all i. For each edge {i, j} of G, the homomorphism f maps
(xij, yij) ∈Yuiuj(F) to a point of Yuiuj(F ′), but by Lemma 5.3(ii) that point is unique, so
we recover f(xij) and f(yij). Similarly, for each non-edge {i, j} of G, Lemma 5.3(iii) lets us
recover f(xij) and f(yij). Together, these determine f.
□
Proof of Theorem 1.1. Propositions 6.1 and 6.2 formally imply that F is fully faithful.
□
10


7. Computability
The speciﬁcation of F in Section 5.A suﬃced for Theorem 1.1. But for the applications
to computable model theory, for G ∈Graphsω we need to modify the deﬁnition of F(G) to
ensure in particular that its domain is ω and not some other countable set. To do this, we
will iteratively build a standard presentation of a function ﬁeld starting from a presentation
of its constant ﬁeld.
Let π: ω × ω
∼→ω be the standard pairing function. We will repeatedly use the following:
Given a ﬁeld k with dom(k) ⊆ω, and given an irreducible polynomial f(x, y) ∈k[x, y] of
y-degree d ∈Z>0, the function ﬁeld of the integral curve f(x, y) = 0 is
k(x)[y]/(f(x, y)) ≃k(x) ⊕k(x)y ⊕· · · ⊕k(x)yd−1,
and the presentation of k can be extended to a presentation of this function ﬁeld on the
disjoint union dom(k) ⊔ω.
Let G = (ω, E) ∈Graphsω. Partition the ω that is to be dom(Fω(G)) into countably
many inﬁnite columns ω[n] := π({n}×ω). Deﬁne ﬁeld operations on K0 := ω[0] so that K0 is
computably isomorphic to Q. For each i ∈ω, use the elements of ω[2i+2] to extend the ﬁeld
Ki to Ki+1 := Ki(X) = Ki(ui+1, vi+1) in a uniform way such that π(ui+1, vi+1) > π(ui, vi).
Then K ≃S Ki, which has domain S
n even ω[n]. Let F0 := K. Next, order the pairs (i, j)
with i > j in lexicographic order, hence in order type ω. If (i, j) is the kth such pair (so
k = i(i−1)
2
+ j + 1), inductively deﬁne Fk by adjoining the elements of ω[2k−1] to Fk−1 in a
uniform way to form the function ﬁeld Fk−1(Z{i,j}). Then deﬁne Fω(G) := S Fk, which has
domain S ω[n] = ω. The action of Fω on morphisms is deﬁned as for F.
Really all we have done is to identify dom(F(G)) with ω. In fact, we might as well modify
the deﬁnition of F so that dom(F(G)) = ω. Then F restricts to Fω.
We record a property of the construction that will be useful in the proof of Theorem 9.7:
Lemma 7.1. Fix G ∈Graphsω. Let µ: G →Fω(G) be the injection sending i to ui. Then
µ is computable, its range µ(G) is a computable subset of Fω(G) = ω, and µ−1 (deﬁned on
µ(G)) is computable. Moreover, µ varies functorially with G.
Proof. The uniformity in the construction of the Ki in Fω(G) ensures that µ is computable
even when G is not. (In fact, µ is independent of G.) Given j ∈Fω(G), we can determine
if j ∈ω[2i+2] for some i ∈ω; if so, then compute ui, and check if j = ui. This lets us check
if j ∈µ(G), and if so computes i such that µ(i) = j.
□
For F ∈Fieldsω, the injection
X(F) ⊆F × F = ω × ω
π
−→ω
deﬁnes a well-ordering on the set X(F).
Lemma 7.2. If F ∈Eω, then there is an order-preserving bijection δF : ω →X(F), and δF
and δ−1
F
are computable uniformly from an F-oracle.
Proof. We have F ≃Fω(G) for some G ∈Graphsω.
By Lemma 5.3(i), #X(F) =
#X(Fω(G)) = #G = ℵ0. Given F, the elements of X(F) can be enumerated by searching
in order; call the ith element δF(i) (starting with i = 0). This deﬁnes δF and shows that δF
and δ−1
F
are computable.
□
11


Lemma 7.3. If G ∈Graphsω, then the bijection ǫG : G →X(Fω(G)) is order-preserving,
and ǫG = δFω(G).
Proof. The bijection ǫG is order-preserving by the condition π(ui+1, vi+1) > π(ui, vi). Since
ǫG and δFω(G) are both order-preserving bijections ω →X(Fω(G)), they are equal.
□
Let us now deﬁne the promised “inverse” functor Gω : Eω →Graphsω. If F is an object
of Eω, then by transport of structure across the bijection δF : ω →X(F), the graph G (F)
with vertex set X(F) becomes a graph Gω(F) with vertex set ω. If f : F →F ′ is a morphism
of Eω, then again by transport of structure, the morphism G (f): G (F) →G (F ′) becomes
Gω(f): Gω(F) →Gω(F ′).
Proposition 7.4. We have GωFω = 1Graphsω.
Proof. If G is an object of Graphsω, the composition of sets
G
ǫG
−→X(Fω(G))
δ−1
Fω(G)
−→Gω(Fω(G))
is the identity ω →ω by Lemma 7.3. Each step is functorial in G by construction.
□
Proposition 7.5. The functor Gω : Eω →Graphs is computable.
Proof. Given F ∈Eω, the construction of Gω(F) is eﬀective, as we now explain. To compute
whether a given pair {i, j} is an edge of Gω(F), ﬁrst use Lemma 7.2 to compute (ui, vi) :=
δF(i) and (uj, vj) := δF(j). By Lemma 5.3(ii,iii), exactly one of Yuiuj and Yui+uj has an
F-point. To ﬁnd out which, search both curves in parallel. When a point is found, which
curve it is on tells us whether {i, j} is an edge.
Given ﬁelds F, F ′ and a morphism f : F →F ′ in Eω, the morphism Gω(f) is the composi-
tion
ω
δF
−→X(F)
f
−→X(F ′)
δ−1
F ′
−→ω,
which is computable by Lemma 7.2.
□
Next is an eﬀective version of Proposition 6.2.
Proposition 7.6. There exists a Turing functional that given F, F ′ ∈E and g : Gω(F) →
Gω(F ′) computes the unique morphism f : F →F ′ of Eω such that Gω(f) = g.
Proof. Existence and uniqueness of f follow from Theorem 1.1. Deﬁne ui, vi ∈F by (ui, vi) =
δF(i) ∈X(F). Since Gω(f) = g, the map X(F) →X(F ′) induced by f is the composition
X(F)
δ−1
F
−→Gω(F)
g
−→Gω(F ′)
δF ′
−→X(F ′).
Thus we may compute f(ui) and f(vi) for any given i ∈ω. For each {i, j}, let (xij, yij) be
the point of Yuiuj(F) or Yui+uj(F), according to whether {i, j} is an edge of Gω(F) or not.
Then f maps (xij, yij) to the unique point of Yf(ui)f(uj)(F ′) or Yf(ui)+f(uj)(F ′), and that point
can be found by a search, so we can compute f(xij) and f(yij). Finally, given any z ∈F,
search for u’s, v’s, x’s, y’s as above and a rational function expressing z in terms of them;
evaluate the same rational function on their images under f to compute f(z) in F ′.
□
Proposition 7.7. The functor Fω : Graphsω →Fieldsω is computable.
12


Proof. The constructions of the ﬁelds Ki and Fi in Section 5 are done by a uniform process,
so Fω(G) has been deﬁned uniformly eﬀectively below a ∆(G)-oracle (speciﬁcally, below the
set E of edges in G). This provides the Turing functional Φ in Deﬁnition 3.1) for Fω.
Now suppose that we are given graphs G and G′ (or rather, their atomic diagrams) and
a morphism g : G →G′. By the previous paragraph, Fω(G) and Fω(G′) are computable
from these. Also, Gω(Fω(g)) is computable, since by Proposition 7.4 it equals g. By Propo-
sition 7.6, we can compute Fω(g).
□
Proposition 7.8. The composition FωGω is computably isomorphic to 1Eω.
Proof. For each F ∈Eω, Proposition 7.4 yields Gω(Fω(Gω(F))) = Gω(F). Applying Propo-
sition 7.6 to the equality in each direction yields an isomorphism Fω(Gω(F)) →F and its
inverse, and shows that they are computable from F. Moreover, the construction is functorial
in F.
□
Proof of Theorem 1.2. Combine Propositions 7.7, 7.5, 7.4, and 7.8.
□
Proof of Proposition 1.5.
(a) Theorem 1.2(b) shows that Fω : Fieldsω →Graphsω is fully faithful; from this, the
result follows formally.
(b) By Corollary 1.3, there exists G ∈I with G ≤T F.
First suppose that G is automorphically trivial. Then so is every other G′ ∈I . For
any automorphically trivial G′, the presence of {i, j} as an edge in G′ is determined by
the answers to the questions of the form “Is i = m?” or “Is j = m?” for m in some ﬁnite
set, so G′ is computable.
Now suppose instead that G is not automorphically trivial. Trivially, Spec G contains
deg G. A theorem of Knight, namely [Kni86, Theorem 4.1], states that if a structure is
not automorphically trivial, then its spectrum is upwards closed. Thus Spec G contains
deg F too. In other words, there exists G′ ∈I with deg G′ = deg F.
□
8. Ordered fields
Proposition 8.1. For each G ∈Graphsω, the ﬁeld Fω(G) is isomorphic to a subﬁeld of R.
Moreover, the ﬁeld homomorphism Fω(G) ֒→R may be chosen so that the induced ordering
on Fω(G) is computable from G.
Proof. Given a subﬁeld k ⊆R, an integral curve Z over k, and a point z ∈Z(R) having at
least one coordinate transcendental over k, we obtain a k-embedding k(Z) ֒→R by sending
f to f(z). We will use this observation inductively to show that all the ﬁelds Ki and Fi in
Section 5 embed into R.
First, K0 := Q is a subﬁeld of R. By the Lindemann–Weierstrass theorem, the numbers
ei := exp(21/i) for i ∈{2, 3, . . .} are algebraically independent over Q. By Lemma 4.1(6), X
has a real point with u-coordinate 10e2j+2; choose the one with least v-coordinate. This lets
us inductively extend Kj−1 ֒→R to Kj = Kj−1(X) ֒→R so that uj maps to 10e2j+2. Taking
the union embeds F0 = K in R. For the kth pair i > j, we have uiuj, ui + uj ∈[20, ∞) and
e2k+3 ∈[1, 2], so by Lemma 4.1(8), the curve Z{i,j} has a real point with x-coordinate e2k+3;
choose the one with least y-coordinate. Thus for each k ≥1 we may extend the embedding
Fk−1 ֒→R to Fk ֒→R. Taking the union yields an embedding Fω(G) ֒→R.
13


Given two distinct elements of Fω(G), expressed in terms of the generators of Fω(G), we
may compute them numerically until we determine which is greater.
□
Unfortunately, Proposition 8.1 implies neither that Fω is a functor to the category of or-
dered ﬁelds (with order-preserving ﬁeld homomorphisms), nor that our completeness results
hold for ordered ﬁelds. The problem is that isomorphisms in the category of ordered ﬁelds
are much more restricted than isomorphisms in the category of ﬁelds. In fact, we have the
following.
Proposition 8.2. There is no faithful functor from Graphsω to the category of ordered
ﬁelds, or even to the category of ordered sets.
Proof. Every (order-preserving) automorphism of a ﬁnite totally ordered set is trivial. There-
fore every ﬁnite-order automorphism of a totally ordered set acts trivially on every orbit, and
hence is trivial. On the other hand, there exist countable graphs with nontrivial ﬁnite-order
automorphisms.
□
9. Consequences in computable model theory
Many of the results below rely on [HKSS02, Theorem 3.1], which shows that for every
countable structure A that is not automorphically trivial, there exists a graph G ∈Graphsω
with the same spectrum and the same d-computable dimension for each Turing degree d,
and with the property that for every relation R on A, there exists a relation on G with the
same degree spectrum as R on A.
9.A. Turing degree spectrum. Recall from Section 2.D the deﬁnition of the spectrum:
Spec M := {deg N : N ≃M and dom(N) = ω}.
Proposition 9.1.
(a) If G ∈Graphsω, then G ≡T Fω(G).
(b) If g : G →G′ is a morphism between computable graphs in Graphsω, then g ≡T Fω(g).
Proof. Theorem 1.2 showed that Fω and Gω are computable functors.
□
Theorem 9.2. Let G ∈Graphsω.
(a) If G is automorphically trivial, then Spec G = {0}, and Spec Fω(G) contains all Turing
degrees.
(b) If G is not automorphically trivial, then Spec G = Spec Fω(G).
Proof.
(a) Every automorphically trivial graph is computable, so Spec G = {0}. The ﬁeld Fω(G)
is computable but not automorphically trivial; Knight’s theorem [Kni86, Theorem 4.1]
applied to Fω(G) yields the result.
(b) Applying Proposition 9.1(a) to every G′ isomorphic to G yields Spec G ⊆Spec Fω(G).
On the other hand, since G is not automorphically trivial, Proposition 1.5(b) yields
Spec Fω(G) ⊆Spec G.
□
Corollary 9.3. For every countable structure A that is not automorphically trivial, there
exists F ∈Fieldsω with Spec F = Spec A.
14


Proof. Since A is not automorphically trivial, [HKSS02, Theorem 3.1] yields some G ∈
Graphsω such that Spec G = Spec A ̸= {0}. By Knight’s theorem, G is not automorphically
trivial, so Theorem 9.2 shows Spec G = Spec Fω(G). Let F := Fω(G).
□
9.B. Computable categoricity. Let A be a computable structure, let d be a Turing degree,
and let α be a computable ordinal. If B is any structure on ω, let B(α) denote the α-jump of
the atomic diagram of B. Let Isomd(A) be the set of d-computable isomorphism classes in the
set of computable structures isomorphic to A; then the cardinal # Isomd(A) ∈{1, 2, . . . , ℵ0}
is called the d-computable dimension of A [HKSS02, Deﬁnition 1.2]. The categoricity spectrum
of A is the set of Turing degrees d such that the d-computable dimension of A is 1. Finally, A
is relatively computably categorical if every structure B ∼= A with domain ω is B-computably
isomorphic to A, and relatively ∆0
α-categorical if every structure B ∼= A with domain ω is
B(α)-computably isomorphic to A.
Theorem 9.4. For every computable structure A, there exists a computable ﬁeld F such
that
(i) for each Turing degree d, the ﬁeld F has the same d-computable dimension as A;
(ii) F has the same categoricity spectrum as A; and
(iii) for every computable ordinal α, the ﬁeld F is relatively ∆0
α-categorical if and only if A
is.
Proof. First suppose that A is automorphically trivial.
Let F = Q.
Then A has d-
computable dimension 1 for every d, and A is relatively ∆0
α-categorical for all α, and the
ﬁeld Q has the same properties.
From now on, suppose that A is not automorphically trivial. Use [HKSS02, Theorem 3.1]
to replace A by a computable graph G on domain ω, and let F = Fω(G).
(i) The functors Fω and Gω are computable (Theorem 1.2), so they map computable
objects of Graphsω to computable objects of Eω and vice versa, and they respect isomor-
phism and d-computable isomorphism of such objects (it will be OK to work in Eω instead
of Fieldsω since all ﬁelds in Fieldsω isomorphic to F are in Eω). Thus they induce maps
between the sets Isomd(G) and Isomd(F). The composition of these maps in either order
is the identity since Gω(Fω(G′)) is computably isomorphic (in fact, equal) to G′ for every
G′ ∈Graphsω and Fω(Gω(F ′)) is computably isomorphic to F ′ for every F ′ ∈Eω (Theo-
rem 1.2(b)). Thus # Isomd(G) = # Isomd(F).
(ii) This follows from (i), since the categoricity spectrum is deﬁned as the set of d such
that the d-computable dimension equals 1.
(iii) Fix α. If G is not relatively ∆0
α-categorical, then some graph G′ violates the condition
in the deﬁnition above, and Fω(G) and Fω(G′) violate the same condition, so Fω(G) is
not relatively ∆0
α-categorical either.
On the other hand, if it holds of G, then it holds
immediately of Fω(G) and every other ﬁeld Fω(G′) with G′ ≃G. But for a ﬁeld F ≃Fω(G),
Corollary 1.3 shows that there exists an F-computable isomorphism f : F →Fω(H) for
some graph H that is isomorphic to G and Turing-computable from F. Therefore, there is a
(deg H)(α)-computable (hence (deg F)(α)-computable) isomorphism g from H onto G, whose
image Fω(g) is a (deg F)(α)-computable isomorphism from Fω(H) onto Fω(G).
So the
composition Fω(g)◦f is a (deg F)(α)-computable isomorphism from F onto Fω(G), proving
that Fω(G) is also relatively ∆0
α-categorical.
□
Corollary 9.5. Fields realize all computable dimensions ≤ω.
15


Proof. Theorems of Goncharov [Gon77,Gon80] and others have shown long since that com-
putable structures (in fact, graphs) can have every computable dimension from 1 up to ℵ0.
(See [AK00, §12.6] for a summary of these results using the terminology of this article.)
Theorem 9.4 allows us to carry this over to ﬁelds.
□
The basic deﬁnition of computable categoricity of a computable structure A shows com-
putable categoricity to be a Π1
1 property: it is deﬁned by a statement using a universal
quantiﬁer over sets of natural numbers. One can view it as saying that, for all subsets f
of ω2 and all e ∈ω, either the eth computable function ϕe fails to deﬁne a computable
structure, or the function (if any) deﬁned on ω by f fails to be an isomorphism from A onto
the structure deﬁned by ϕe, or else there exists a Turing program which computes an iso-
morphism from that structure onto A. All quantiﬁers over natural numbers can be absorbed
into the universal quantiﬁer over sets, so we view this formula as universal over sets, i.e., Π1
1,
with the superscript 1 signifying quantiﬁcation over sets.
Sometimes a Π1
1 property is expressible also by a simpler formula. In [DKL+15, Theo-
rem 1], however, Downey, Kach, Lempp, Lewis, Montalbán, and Turetsky give a proof that
computable categoricity for trees is Π1
1-complete. Theorem 1.2 allows us to transfer this
result to ﬁelds.
Theorem 9.6. The property of computable categoricity for computable ﬁelds is Π1
1-complete.
That is,
{e ∈ω : ϕe computes the atomic diagram of a computably categorical ﬁeld}
is a Π1
1 set, and every Π1
1 set is 1-reducible to this set.
In contrast, the property of computable catgeoricity for algebraic ﬁelds is just Π0
4-complete
(see [HKMS15, Theorem 5.4]). For ﬁelds of inﬁnite transcendence degree, it was shown only
recently, in [MS13, Theorem 3.4], that they could be computably categorical at all, and
it was not known whether they could be computably categorical without being relatively
computably categorical, which is a Σ0
3 property. So Theorem 9.6 represents a signiﬁcant step
forward.
Proof. Theorem 3.1 of [HKSS02] enables us to build a computable graph corresponding to
an arbitrary computable tree, eﬀectively in the index of the tree, and then Theorem 1.2
builds a computable ﬁeld that is computably categorical if and only if the graph (and hence
the original tree) was. Thus we have a 1-reduction from a Π1
1-complete set (the indices of
computably categorical trees) to the set of indices of computably categorical ﬁelds.
□
9.C. Degree spectrum. The degree spectrum DgSpA(R) of a relation R on a computable
structure A is the set of all Turing degrees of images of R under isomorphisms f from A
onto computable structures B. (Understand that here the relation R is generally not in the
language; if it were, then this image would always be computable, just by the deﬁnition of
a computable structure. The relation R may be deﬁnable in the language of the structure,
however, in which case its deﬁnition places an upper bound on the complexity of these
images.)
If f is computable, then f(R) is Turing-equivalent to R itself; thus it is the
noncomputable f that give this deﬁnition its teeth. Here we show that all degree spectra
of relations on automorphically nontrivial computable structures can be realized as degree
spectra of relations on ﬁelds:
16


Theorem 9.7. Let A be any computable structure that is not automorphically trivial, and
let R be an n-ary relation on A. Then there exists a ﬁeld F and an n-ary relation S on F
such that
DgSpA(R) = DgSpF(S).
Proof. As usual, we appeal to [HKSS02, Theorem 3.1] to assume that A is in fact a graph,
hereafter named G. For this proof, Theorem 1.2 is not quite enough; to transfer relations
we need also Lemma 7.1, about the map µ: G →Fω(G) and its inverse. Let F = Fω(G),
and let S = µ(R) ⊆F n (apply µ coordinate-wise).
Suppose that g : G →G′ is an isomorphism of computable graphs in Graphsω. In the
diagram of sets
G
g

µ
/ Fω(G)
Fω(g)

G′
µ
/ Fω(G′),
R and S map downwards to relations R′ on G′ and S′ on Fω(G′), and DgSpG(R) consists of
the degrees deg R′ arising in this way from all possible g. By functoriality of µ, the diagram
commutes, so the bottom horizontal µ maps R′ to S′. Since µ and µ−1 are computable,
R′ ≡T S′. Thus deg R′ = deg S′ ∈DgSpF(S). Hence DgSpG(R) ⊆DgSpF(S).
Now suppose that f : F →F ′ is an isomorphism of computable ﬁelds in Fieldsω; it maps S
to some S′; then DgSpF(S) consists of the degrees deg S′ arising in this way. By Corollary 1.4,
there is a computable graph G′ ≃G and a computable isomorphism i: F ′ →Fω(G′).
Composing f with a computable isomorphism does not change the resulting Turing degree
deg S′, so we may assume that F ′ equals Fω(G′). Since Fω is fully faithful, f is Fω(g) for
some isomorphism g : G →G′. This g maps R to some R′, and the previous paragraph shows
that deg S′ = deg R′ ∈DgSpG(R). Hence DgSpF(S) ⊆DgSpG(R).
□
Remark 9.8. It is not true that for every automorphically nontrivial computable structure
A, there exists a computable ﬁeld F of characteristic 0 such that for every relation S on F,
there exists a relation R on A with the same degree spectrum. For example, suppose that A
is the random graph or the countable dense linear order; then the degree spectrum of every
relation on A either is {0} or is upwards-closed under ≤T ; see [HM07, Corollary 2.11 and
Proposition 3.6]. On the other hand, in every computable ﬁeld F of characteristic 0, one can
eﬀectively locate each positive integer n (meaning the sum 1 + · · · + 1 of the multiplicative
identity with itself n times — not the element n of the domain ω), and therefore the unary
relation S consisting of those n that lie in the Halting Problem will have degree spectrum
exactly {0′}.
The restriction to automorphically nontrivial structures A in Theorem 9.7 can be bypassed
for unary relations, since on an automorphically trivial computable structure A, each unary
relation has degree spectrum either {0} (if the relation is either ﬁnite or coﬁnite) or else the
set of all Turing degrees. Both of these can easily be realized as spectra of unary relations
on ﬁelds. We leave the analysis of n-ary relations on such structures for another time.
Functoriality also allows one to show that a relation R on a countable graph G is relatively
intrinsically Σ0
α if and only if its image h(R) (deﬁned exactly as in the proof of Theorem 9.7)
is relatively intrinsically Σ0
α on the ﬁeld Fω(G); and similarly for relations that are relatively
17


intrinsically Π0
α, Σ1
m, etc. Likewise, every deﬁnable relation on G is mapped to a deﬁnable
relation on Fω(G): this is immediate if one views our construction as a bi-interpretation
between the graph and the ﬁeld.
9.D. Automorphism spectrum. In [HMM10, Deﬁnition 1.1], Harizanov, Miller, and Mo-
rozov deﬁned the automorphism spectrum of a computable structure to be the set of all Turing
degrees of nontrivial automorphisms of the structure. They used [HKSS02, Theorem 3.1]
to show that every automorphism spectrum is the automorphism spectrum of a computable
graph. This sets up another application of Theorem 1.2.
Theorem 9.9. For every computable structure A, there is a computable ﬁeld F with the
same automorphism spectrum as A.
Proof. The theorem follows from the full faithfulness of Fω, along with its preservation of
Turing degrees of automorphisms (Proposition 9.1(b)).
□
Appendix A. Algebraic geometry facts
Lemma A.1. If V and W are varieties over a ﬁeld k, and W is integral, then V (k(W)) is
in bijection with the set of rational maps W 99K V .
Proof. The description of a point in V (k(W)) involves only ﬁnitely many elements of k(W),
and there is a dense open subvariety U ⊆W on which they are all regular.
□
Lemma A.2. Let k be a ﬁeld of characteristic 0. Let C and D be geometrically integral
curves over k such that gC = gD > 1. Every nonconstant rational map C 99K D is birational.
Proof. This is a well known consequence of Hurwitz’s formula.
□
Lemma A.3. Let V1, . . . , Vn be geometrically integral varieties over a ﬁeld k of characteris-
tic 0. Let C be a geometrically integral curve over k such that gC > 1. Then each rational
map V1 × · · · × Vn 99K C factors through the projection V1 × · · · × Vn →Vi for at least one i.
Proof. By induction, we may assume that n = 2. We may assume that k is algebraically
closed. A rational map φ: V1 × V2 99K C may be viewed as an algebraic family of rational
maps V1 99K C parametrized by (an open subvariety of) V2. By the de Franchis–Severi
theorem [Lan60, pp. 29–30] there are only ﬁnitely many nonconstant rational maps V1 99K C,
so they do not vary in algebraic families. Thus either the rational maps in the family are all
the same, in which case φ factors through the ﬁrst projection, or each rational map in the
family is constant, in which case φ factors through the second projection.
□
Remark A.4. Lemma A.3 holds even if char k = p. This can be deduced from the charac-
teristic p analogue of the de Franchis–Severi theorem [Sam66, Théorème 2]: even though
the set of nonconstant rational maps V1 99K C can now be inﬁnite (because of Frobenius
morphisms), they still do not vary in algebraic families.
References
[AK00] C.J. Ash and J.F. Knight, Computable Structures and the Hyperarithmetical Hierarchy, Else-
vier, Amsterdam, 2000.
[DJ94] R.G. Downey and C.G. Jockusch Jr., Every low Boolean algebra is isomorphic to a recursive
one, Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society 122 (1994), 871–880.
18


[DKL+15] R.G. Downey, A.M. Kach, S. Lempp, A.E.M. Lewis-Pye, A. Montalbán, and D.D. Turetsky,
The complexity of computable categoricity, Advances in Mathematics 268 (2015), 423–466.
[FKM10] Ekaterina Fokina, Iskander Kalimullin, and Russell Miller, Degrees of categoricity of com-
putable structures, Archive for Mathematical Logic 49 (2010), 51–67.
[Gon77] S.S. Goncharov, The quantity of nonautoequivalent constructivizations, Algebra and Logic 16
(1977), 169–185 (English translation).
[Gon80] S.S. Goncharov, The problem of the number of nonautoequivalent constructivizations, Algebra
and Logic 19 (1980), 401–414 (English translation).
[Gon81] S.S. Goncharov, Groups with a ﬁnite number of constructivizations, Soviet Math. Dokl. 23
(1981), 58–61.
[GD80] S.S. Goncharov and V.D. Dzgoev, Autostability of models, Algebra and Logic 19 (1980), 45–58
(Russian), 28–37 (English translation).
[HM07] Valentina Harizanov and Russell Miller, Spectra of structures and relations, The Journal of
Symbolic Logic 72 (2007), 324–348.
[HMM10] Valentina Harizanov, Russell Miller, and Andrei Morozov, Simple structures with complex
symmetry, Algebra and Logic 49 (2010), 68–90.
[HTMMM15] Matthew Harrison-Trainor, Alexander Melnikov, Russell Miller, and Antonio Montalbán, Com-
putable functors and eﬀective interpretability, June 9, 2015. Preprint, arXiv:1506.02737v1.
[HKSS02] Denis R. Hirschfeldt, Bakhadyr Khoussainov, Richard A. Shore, and Arkadii M. Slinko, Degree
spectra and computable dimensions in algebraic structures, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic
115 (2002), 71–113.
[HKMS15] Denis R. Hirschfeldt, Ken Kramer, Russell Miller, and Alexandra Shlapentokh, Categoricity
properties for computable algebraic ﬁelds, Transactions of the American Mathematical Society
367 (2015), 3955–3980.
[JS91] Carl G. Jockusch and Robert Soare, Degrees of orderings not isomorphic to recursive linear
orderings, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 52 (1991), 39–64.
[Kni86] Julia F. Knight, Degrees coded in jumps of orderings, J. Symb. Log. 51 (1986), 1034–1042.
[KMVB07] Julia F. Knight, Sara Miller, and Michael Vanden Boom, Turing computable embeddings, J.
Symb. Log. 72 (2007), no. 3, 901–918, DOI 10.2178/jsl/1191333847.
[Lan60] Serge Lang, Integral points on curves, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 6 (1960), 27–43.
MR0130219 (24 #A86)
[LMMS05] Steﬀen Lempp, Charles McCoy, Russell Miller, and Reed Solomon, Computable categoricity
of trees of ﬁnite height, Journal of Symbolic Logic 70 (2005), 151–215.
[Lev09] Oscar Levin, Computability Theory, Reverse Mathematics and Ordered Fields, 2009. Ph.D.
thesis, University of Connecticut.
[Mil09] Russell Miller, d-Computable categoricity for algebraic ﬁelds, Journal of Symbolic Logic 74
(2009), 1325–1351.
[MS13] Russell Miller and Hans Schoutens, Computably categorical ﬁelds via Fermat’s Last Theorem,
Computability 2 (2013), 51–65.
[Mon14] Antonio Montalbán, Computably theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures (2014).
[Poo05] Bjorn Poonen, Varieties without extra automorphisms. III. Hypersurfaces, Finite Fields Appl.
11 (2005), no. 2, 230–268, DOI 10.1016/j.ﬀa.2004.12.001. MR2129679 (2006e:14060)
[PER89] Marian B. Pour-El and J. Ian Richards, Computability in analysis and physics, Perspectives
in Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989. MR1005942 (90k:03062)
[Rem81] J.B. Remmel, Recursively categorical linear orderings, Proceedings of the American Mathe-
matical Society 83 (1981), 387–391.
[Ric81] Linda Jean Richter, Degrees of structures, Journal of Symbolic Logic 46 (1981), 723–731.
[Sam66] Pierre Samuel, Compléments à un article de Hans Grauert sur la conjecture de Mordell, Inst.
Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 29 (1966), 55–62 (French). MR0204430 (34 #4272)
19


Department of Mathematics, Queens College, Queens, NY 11367 & Ph.D. Programs in
Mathematics and Computer Science, CUNY Graduate Center, New York, NY 10016, USA
E-mail address: Russell.Miller@qc.cuny.edu
URL: http://qcpages.qc.cuny.edu/~rmiller
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA
02139-4307, USA
E-mail address: poonen@math.mit.edu
URL: http://math.mit.edu/~poonen
Department of Mathematics, New York City College of Technology, 300 Jay Street,
Brooklyn, NY 11201 & Ph.D. Program in Mathematics, CUNY Graduate Center, New York,
NY 10016, USA
E-mail address: hschoutens@citytech.cuny.edu
Department of Mathematics, East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA
E-mail address: shlapentokha@ecu.edu
URL: http://myweb.ecu.edu/shlapentokha/
20
