arXiv:1807.02715v1  [math.LO]  7 Jul 2018
Complexity of Scott Sentences
Rachael Alvir
Department of Mathematics
University of Notre Dame
255 Hurley
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
E-mail: ralvir@nd.edu
Julia F. Knight
Department of Mathematics
University of Notre Dame
255 Hurley
Notre Dame, IN 46556, USA
E-mail: Julia.F.Knight.1@nd.edu
Charles McCoy CSC
Department of Mathematics
University of Portland
5000 N. Willamette Blvd.,
Portland, Oregon 97203, USA
E-mail: mccoy@up.edu
July 10, 2018
Abstract
We give eﬀective versions of some results on Scott sentences. We
show that if A has a computable Πα Scott sentence, then the orbits
of all tuples are deﬁned by formulas that are computable Σβ for
some β < α. (This is an eﬀective version of a result of Montalb´an
[11].) We show that if a countable structure A has a computable Σα
2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: Primary 03D99; Secondary 03E15.
Key words and phrases: Inﬁnitary Logic, Scott Sentence, Borel Hierarchy, Finitely
Generated Groups, Computable Structure Theory.
1


2
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
Scott sentence and one that is computable Πα, then it has one that
is computable d-Σβ for some β < α. (This is an eﬀective version
of a result of A. Miller [9].) We also give an eﬀective version of a
result of D. Miller [10]. Using the non-eﬀective results of Montalb´an
and A. Miller, we show that a ﬁnitely generated group has a d-Σ2
Scott sentence iﬀthe orbit of some (or every) generating tuple is
deﬁned by a Π1 formula. Using our eﬀective results, we show that for
a computable ﬁnitely generated group, there is a computable d-Σ2
Scott sentence iﬀthe orbit of some (every) generating tuple is deﬁned
by a computable Π1 formula.
1
Introduction
The Lω1ω-formulas are inﬁnitary formulas in which the disjunctions and
conjunctions are over countable sets, and the strings of quantiﬁers are ﬁnite.
We consider Lω1ω-formulas with only ﬁnitely many free variables. There is
no prenex normal form for Lω1ω-formulas. We cannot, in general, bring the
quantiﬁers to the front. However, we can bring the negations inside, and
this gives a kind of normal form. Formulas in this normal form are classiﬁed
as Σα or Πα for countable ordinals α.
1. A formula ϕ(¯x) is Σ0 and Π0 if it is ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free.
2. Let α > 0.
(a) ϕ(¯x) is Σα if it is a countable disjunction of formulas (∃¯u)ψ(¯x, ¯u),
where ψ is Πβ for some β < α.
(b) ϕ(¯x) is Πα if it is a countable conjunction of formulas (∀¯u)ψ(¯x, ¯u),
where ψ is Σβ for some β < α.
We use special notation for some further classes of formulas.
1. A formula is Σ<α (resp. Π<α) if it is Σβ (resp. Πβ) for some β < α.
2. A formula is d-Σα if it is the conjunction of a formula that is Σα and
one that is Πα.
Negations. For a Σα (resp. Πα) formula ϕ, in normal form, we write neg(ϕ)
for the natural Πα (resp. Σα) formula in normal form that is logically equiv-
alent to the negation of ϕ.
Computable inﬁnitary formulas. Roughly speaking, the computable in-
ﬁnitary formulas are formulas of Lω1ω in which the inﬁnite disjunctions and


Complexity of Scott Sentences
3
conjunctions are over c.e. sets. For more about computable inﬁnitary formu-
las, see [1]. We classify the computable inﬁnitary formulas as computable Σα
or computable Πα for computable ordinals α. We may refer to computable
Σ<α formulas, or computable d-Σα formulas.
Scott [13] proved the following.
Theorem 1.1 (Scott Isomorphism Theorem). Let A be a countable struc-
ture for a countable language L. Then there is a sentence of Lω1ω whose
countable models are just the isomorphic copies of A.
A sentence with the property above is called a Scott sentence for A. The
complexity of an optimal Scott sentence for a structure A measures the
internal complexity of A.
For a countable language L, let C be a countably inﬁnite set of new
constants. Identifying the constants with natural numbers, we suppose that
C = ω. Let Mod(L) be the class of L-structures with universe ω, and for
a computable inﬁnitary sentence ψ in the language L ∪C, let Mod(ψ) be
the class of L-structures with universe ω that satisfy ψ. There is a natural
topology on Mod(L), generated by basic open (actually clopen) neighbor-
hoods of the form Mod(ϕ), for ϕ a ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free sentence in the
language L ∪C. We deﬁne the Borel hierarchy of classes K ⊆Mod(L) as
follows.
1. K is Σ0 and Π0 if it is a basic clopen neighborhood.
2. For 0 < α < ω1,
(a) K is Σα if it is a countable union of sets each of which is Πβ for
some β < α.
(b) K is Πα if it is a countable intersection of sets each of which is
Σβ for some β < α.
(c) K is d-Σα if it is a diﬀerence of Σα sets.
Vaught [15] proved the following.
Theorem 1.2 (Vaught). For a set K ⊆Mod(L), closed under isomor-
phism, K is Πα in the Borel hierarchy iﬀthere is a Πα sentence ϕ of Lω1ω
such that K = Mod(ϕ).


4
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
It is easy to see, as a corollary of Vaught’s Theorem, that the same holds
for Σα and d-Σα sets and sentences.
If L is a computable language, then we have also the eﬀective Borel
hierarchy. Let K ⊆Mod(L).
1. K is eﬀective Σ0 and eﬀective Π0 if it is a basic clopen neighborhood.
2. For 0 < α < ωCK
1
,
(a) K is eﬀective Σα if it is a c.e. union of sets each of which is
eﬀective Πβ for some β < α,
(b) K is eﬀective Πα if it is a c.e. intersection of sets each of which
is eﬀective Σβ for some β < α.
We may eﬀectively identify elements of Mod(L) with elements of 2ω,
and then the eﬀective Borel sets are exactly the hyperarithmetical sets of
functions in 2ω. Vanden Boom [14] proved the eﬀective analogue of Vaught’s
Theorem.
Theorem 1.3 (Vanden Boom). For a set K ⊆Mod(L), closed under iso-
morphism, K is Πα in the eﬀective Borel hierarchy iﬀthere is a computable
Πα sentence ϕ of Lω1ω such that K = Mod(ϕ).
Montalb´an [11] proved that for a countable ordinal α ≥1, a countable
structure A has a Πα+1 Scott sentence iﬀthe orbits of all tuples are deﬁned
by Σα formulas. The implication ⇐is as in the proof of Scott’s Theorem.
For the implication ⇒, Montalb´an’s proof was clever. We shall use the ideas
from his proof to obtain further results.
In Section 2, we show that for a countable ordinal α ≥2, if A has
a Πα Scott sentence, then the orbits of all tuples in A are deﬁned by Σ<α
formulas. (Montalb´an’s Theorem gives this in the case where α is a successor
ordinal.) For limit α, the implication ⇐fails. There are familiar structures
A such that the orbits of all tuples are deﬁned by Σ<ω formulas but there
is no Πω Scott sentence. Next, we give an eﬀective version of Montalb´an’s
theorem, saying that for a computable ordinal α ≥2, if A has a computable
Πα Scott sentence, then the orbits of all tuples are deﬁned by computable
Σ<α formulas. Even for successor ordinals α, the implication ⇐fails. We
construct an example of a computable structure such that the orbits of
all tuples are deﬁned by ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free formulas, but there is no
computable Π2 Scott sentence.


Complexity of Scott Sentences
5
In Section 3, we consider further results that can be proved using ideas
from Section 2. A. Miller showed that if A has a Πα Scott sentence and a
Σα Scott sentence, then it has a Scott sentence that is d-Σ<α. The proof
was based on a result of D. Miller [10] on separators for disjoint sets ax-
iomatized by Πα sentences. Our Theorem 3.2 is an eﬀective version of the
result of A. Miller, saying that if A has a computable Πα Scott sentence
and a computable Σα Scott sentence, then it has a Scott sentence that is
computable d-Σ<α. In [10], D. Miller gave an eﬀective version of his result,
which, unfortunately, was not suﬃcient to prove Theorem 3.2. We give a
direct proof of Theorem 3.2. Then, in Theorem 3.4, we give an eﬀective
version of the result of D. Miller that would have served to prove Theorem
3.2.
In Section 4, we consider ﬁnitely generated groups. For such a group,
there is always a Σ3 Scott sentence, and if the group is computable, then
there is a computable Σ3 Scott sentence (see [8]). Often, however, there is a
simpler Scott sentence. In fact, the second author had conjectured that every
ﬁnitely generated group has a d-Σ2 Scott sentence, and every computable
ﬁnitely generated group has a computable d-Σ2 Scott sentence. Recently,
Harrison-Trainor and Ho [4] gave an example disproving both conjectures.
We show that if G is a ﬁnitely generated group, then G has a d-Σ2 Scott
sentence iﬀthere is a generating tuple whose orbit is deﬁned by a Π1 formula,
and if G is a computable ﬁnitely generated group, then G has a computable
d-Σ2 Scott sentence iﬀthere is a generating tuple whose orbit is deﬁned by
a computable Π1-formula.
Recall that the deﬁnition above of Mod(L), all L-structures have universe
ω. Throughout this paper, all structures given are assumed to be countably
inﬁnite with universe ω, and all structures we build are guaranteed by our
techniques to have universe ω.
2
Varying Montalb´an’s Theorem
Montalb´an [11] proved the following.
Theorem 2.1 (Montalb´an). Suppose α ≥1 is a countable ordinal, and let
A be a countable structure for a countable language L. Then A has a Πα+1
Scott sentence iﬀthe automorphism orbit of each tuple is deﬁned by a Σα
formula.
For the implication ⇐, the proof is as for Scott’s Isomorphism Theorem.


6
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
Proof of ⇐. For each ¯a, let ϕ¯a(¯x) be a Σα formula that deﬁnes the orbit of
¯a. For each ¯a, we determine a sentence ρ¯a as follows.
• ρ∅: V
b(∃x)ϕb(x) & (∀x) W
b ϕb(x)
• ρ¯a: (∀¯u)[ϕ¯a(¯u) →(V
b(∃x)ϕ¯a,b(¯u, x) & (∀x) W
b ϕ¯a,b(x))]
Our Scott sentence is the conjunction of the sentences ρ¯a. It is not diﬃcult
to see that this is Πα+1.
The implication ⇒in Montalb´an’s result also holds for limit ordinals,
with no change in the proof. Here is the statement.
Theorem 2.2. Let A be a countable structure for a countable language L.
Let α ≥2. If A has a Πα Scott sentence, then the orbit of each tuple is
deﬁned by a Σ<α formula.
In our account of Montalb´an’s proof, we use a “consistency property.”
This is a family of sets of sentences arising in a kind of Henkin construction,
developed by Makkai for producing models of Lω1ω sentences. See [6] for a
discussion of consistency properties. The deﬁnition that we give below is
not standard, but it suits our needs.
Deﬁnition 1. Let L be a countable language, and let C be a countably
inﬁnite set of new constants. A consistency property is a non-empty set C
of ﬁnite sets S of sentences, each obtained by substituting constants from
C for the free variables in an Lω1ω formula in normal form, such that the
following conditions hold:
1. for S ∈C, if ϕ ∈S, where ϕ = V
i(∀¯ui)ϕi(¯ui), then for each i and
each appropriate tuple of constants ¯c, there exists S′ ⊇S in C with
ϕi(¯c) ∈S′,
2. for S ∈C, if ϕ ∈S, where ϕ = W
i(∃¯ui)ϕi(¯ui), then for some i and ¯c,
there exists S′ ⊇S in C with ϕi(¯c) ∈S′,
3. for S ∈C, for each ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free L-formula ϕ(¯x) and appro-
priate tuple ¯c, there exists S′ ⊇S in C with ±ϕ(¯c) ∈S′,
4. for S ∈C, if F is an n-place function symbol, and c1, . . . , cn ∈C,
there is a constant d ∈C such that for some S′ ⊇S in C, the sentence
F(c1, . . . , cn) = d is in S′,
5. for S ∈C, and distinct c, c′ ∈C, the sentence c = c′ is not in S,


Complexity of Scott Sentences
7
6. for S ∈C, the set of ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free sentences in S is consis-
tent.
Lemma 2.3. If C is a consistency property, then we can form a countable
chain (Sn)n∈ω of elements of C such that the set {Sn : n ∈ω} is also a
consistency property.
Proof sketch. This is clear just from the fact that the sets S in C are ﬁnite,
and there are only ﬁnitely many clauses (in the deﬁnition of consistency
property) asking for extensions.
Proposition 2.4. Let (Sn)n∈ω be a countable chain such that {Sn : n ∈ω}
is a consistency property. Then the set of atomic sentences and negations of
atomic sentences in ∪nSn is the atomic diagram of a well deﬁned structure
B, with universe equal to C. Moreover, all sentences ϕ ∈∪nSn are true of
the appropriate elements in B.
Proof. For an n-placed relation symbol R, we let RB be the set of (c1, . . . , cn)
such that R(c1, . . . , cn) ∈∪nSn. Conditions (3) and (6) guarantee that RB is
a well-deﬁned relation on Cn. Suppose F is an n-placed function symbol in
L. Then F B(c1, . . . , cn) = d if the sentence F(c1, . . . , cn) = d is in some Sn.
Conditions (4), (5), and (6) guarantee that F B is well-deﬁned. For c, d ∈C,
the sentence c = d is in ∪nSn iﬀthe constants c and d are actually the same.
An easy induction on terms τ(¯x) shows that τ B(¯c) = d iﬀthe sentence
τ(¯c) = d is in ∪nSn. Then an easy induction on ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free
formulas ϕ shows that B |= ϕ(¯c) iﬀthe sentence ϕ(¯c) is in ∪nSn. Finally,
an easy induction on sentences shows that if ϕ ∈∪nSn, then B |= ϕ.
We want a consistency property C that produces models of the Πα Scott
sentence ϕ = V
i(∀¯ui)ϕi(¯ui), where ϕi(¯ui) = W
j(∃¯vi,j)ψi,j(¯ui, ¯vi,j). We also
want to control the complexity of the sentences that appear in S ∈C.
Instead of putting ϕ into various sets S ∈C, we add to the six conditions
in the deﬁnition of consistency property a seventh condition guaranteeing
that ϕ is witnessed.
7. for S ∈C, for each i and each appropriate ¯c, there exist j, and an
appropriate ¯d such that for some S′ ⊇S in C, ψi,j(¯c, ¯d) ∈S′.
If C is a consistency property satisfying Conditions (1)–(7), then there
is a chain (Sn)n∈ω of elements of C such that {Sn : n ∈ω} also satisﬁes
Conditions (1)–(7). For any such chain (Sn)n∈ω the resulting structure is a
model of ϕ. Our consistency property C will be the set of ﬁnite sets S of


8
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
sentences in the language L∪C, each Σβ or Πβ for some β such that β+1 < α
(and each, recall, obtained by substituting constants from C for the free
variables in an Lω1ω formula in normal form), where some interpretation
of the constants from C appearing in the sentences of S, mapping distinct
constants to distinct elements of A, makes all of these sentences true. (Since
the set of sentences is ﬁnite, there are only ﬁnitely many constants from C
to assign to elements of A.) It is easy to see that this satisﬁes Conditions
(1)–(7).
Claim: For each tuple ¯a of distinct elements, our C fails to satisfy the
following further condition.
8. for each S ∈C, and for each ¯c, a tuple of distinct constants of the
same length as ¯a, there is some Π<α formula ψ(¯x) = V
i(∀¯ui)ψi(¯x, ¯ui),
true of ¯a, and some S′ ⊇S in C such that for some i and some ¯d,
neg(ψi(¯c, ¯d)) ∈S′. (Note that for some β such that β + 1 < α, ψi(¯c, ¯d)
is Σβ, and neg(ψi(¯c, ¯d)) is Πβ.)
Proof of Claim. If our C satisﬁed Conditions (1)–(8), then, we would have
countable chains (Sn)n∈ω yielding models of ϕ with no tuple satisfying all
of the Π<α formulas true of ¯a. Since ϕ is a Scott sentence for A, this is
impossible.
By the Claim, there must be some set of sentences S ∈C and some
tuple of distinct constants ¯c from C, of the same length as ¯a, that witness
the failure of Condition (8). Let ¯c′ be the tuple of all constants from C,
other than ¯c, appearing in S, and let χ(¯c, ¯c′) be the ﬁnite conjunction of
the sentences in S and sentences expresssing that the elements of ¯c, ¯c′ are
pairwise distinct. Then A satisﬁes the Σ<α sentence (∃¯x)χ(¯a, ¯x); and for all
Π<α formulas ψ true of ¯a, A satisﬁes the Π<α sentences logically equivalent
to (∀¯u)[(∃¯x)χ(¯u, ¯x) →ψ(¯u)]. Thus, we have a Σ<α formula (∃¯x)χ(¯u, ¯x) that
generates the complete Π<α type of ¯a. For each ¯a, let ϕ¯a(¯u) be a Σ<α formula
that generates the complete Π<α type of ¯a. We claim that these formulas
deﬁne the orbits. To show this, it is enough to prove the following lemma.
Lemma 2.5. The family F of ﬁnite functions taking ¯a to a tuple ¯b satisfying
ϕ¯a has the back-and-forth property.
Proof of Lemma. We ﬁrst show that for any ¯a and ¯b, if ¯b satisﬁes ϕ¯a, then
¯a satisﬁes ϕ¯b. To see this, note that neg(ϕ¯b(¯x)) is Π<α. If this were true of
¯a, then it would be true of ¯b, a contradiction. Suppose ¯b satisﬁes ϕ¯a(¯x). For


Complexity of Scott Sentences
9
any d, there exists c such that ¯a, c satisﬁes ϕ¯b,d(¯x, y). To see this, note that
(∀y)neg(ϕ¯b,d(¯x, y)) is Π<α, so if it were true of ¯a, then it would also be true
of ¯b, a contradiction. If ¯a, c satisﬁes ϕ¯b,d(¯x, y), then ¯b, d satisﬁes ϕ¯a,c(¯x, y),
so we can go back. Now, suppose that ¯b satisﬁes ϕ¯a(¯x), and take c. Since
¯a satisﬁes ϕ¯b(¯x), the argument above says that there exists d such that ¯b, d
satisﬁes ϕ¯a,c(¯x, y), and then ¯a, c satisﬁes ϕ¯b,d(¯x, y). Therefore, we can go
forth. Hence, for each ¯a, ϕ¯a(¯x) is a Σ<α formula that deﬁnes the orbit of ¯a.
This completes the proof of Theorem 2.2.
Below, we give a pair of examples.
Example 1. Let A be an ordering of type ωω. Then the orbits of all tuples
in A are deﬁned by Σ<ω formulas (in fact, the natural deﬁning formulas are
computable Σ<ω). However, A has no Πω Scott sentence.
Proof. We use the following familiar results (see [1]).
Facts:
1. ωω ≤ω ωω+1,
2. for each β < ωω, there are computable Σ<ω formulas λ(x) and µ(x, y)
such that λ(x) holds iﬀthe interval to the left of x has order type β
and µ(x, y) holds iﬀthe interval between x and y has order type β.
It follows from Fact 1 and a well-known result of Karp (see [6] or [7]) that
every Πω sentence true of ωω is true of ωω+1. Therefore, ωω has no Πω Scott
sentence. Take a tuple ¯a = (a1, . . . , an). Ordinals are rigid, so to deﬁne the
orbit of ¯a, we deﬁne the tuple itself. Say that the interval to the left of
ai has type βi. Applying Fact 2, we get a computable Σ<ω formula λi(xi)
saying that the interval to the left of xi has type βi. The conjunction of the
formulas λi(xi) deﬁnes the tuple ¯a.
Example 2. Let A be an expansion of the ordering of type ωω with a unary
predicate U0 for the interval [0, ω) and unary predicates Un for the interval
[ωn, ωn+1), for n ≥1. Again, we have computable Σ<ω formulas deﬁning the
orbits of all tuples. We have a computable Πω Scott sentence. This is the
conjunction of a computable Π2 sentence saying (∀x) W
n Un(x), a ﬁnitary Π2
sentence saying that < is a linear ordering of the universe, with all elements
of Un before all elements of Un+1, and computable Σ<ω sentences saying
what is the order type of Un.
We turn to the eﬀective version of Theorem 2.2.


10
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
Theorem 2.6. Let A be a structure for a computable language L (the
structure need not have a computable copy). Suppose α ≥2. If A has a
computable Πα Scott sentence, then the orbit of each tuple is deﬁned by a
computable Σ<α formula.
Proof. The proof essentially the same as that for Theorem 2.2. The cor-
responding rules for a consistency property involve computable inﬁnitary
formulas, so the conjunctions and disjunctions are over c.e. sets of indices.
Our particular consistency property C will consist of the ﬁnite sets of com-
putable Πβ and computable Σβ sentences, for β + 1 < α, such that some
interpretation of the constants, mapping distinct constants to distinct ele-
ments of A, makes all of the sentences true. These technical changes neces-
sitate no signiﬁcant change in the argument that constructs, for each tuple
¯a, a computable Σ<α formula true of ¯a that implies all computable Π<α
formulas true of ¯a.
For each ¯a, let ϕ¯a(¯x) be a Σ<α formula that implies all computable Π<α-
formulas true of ¯a. To show that for each ¯a, the orbit is deﬁned by ϕ¯a, the
following analogue of Lemma 2.5 suﬃces; the proof is exactly the same as
above.
Lemma 2.7. The family F of ﬁnite functions taking a tuple ¯a to a tuple ¯b
satisfying ϕ¯a has the back-and-forth property.
We do not have the eﬀective version for the other implication even in
the case where α is a computable successor ordinal.
Proposition 2.8. There is a computable structure A such that the orbits
of all tuples are deﬁned by computable Σ1 (even ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free)
formulas, but there is no computable Π2 Scott sentence.
Proof. The proof owes much to that of Badaev [2], showing that there is
a computable enumeration of a “discrete” set of functions that is not “ef-
fectively discrete”. We start with a computable subtree T of 2<ω with the
following features.
1. There are no terminal nodes.
2. There is just one non-isolated path p, where this is non-computable.
We may construct T such that for all σ ∈T, σ0 ∈T, and the only
non-isolated path has the form 0s01k00s11k1 . . ., where (kn)n∈ω is a list of


Complexity of Scott Sentences
11
the elements of the halting set, in increasing order, and sn is the number of
steps in the halting computation of ϕkn(kn). At stage 0, we put ∅into T.
Suppose that we have determined Ts at stage s, where Ts is the set of nodes
in T of length at most s. At stage s + 1, we add σ0 for all σ of length s.
In addition, we consider ϕk,s+1(k) for all k ≤s + 1. For the computations
that halt, we arrange the k’s to form k0 < k1 < . . . < kr, and determine
the appropriate halting times s0, . . . , sr. We put into Ts+1 the appropriate
initial segment of the sequence 0s01k0 · · ·0sr1kr. Note that if we are inserting
a new ki, it is because si = s+1, and we already had the appropriate initial
segment in Ts. At stage s + 1, the nodes just described are the only ones
that we add to Ts+1. Therefore, the tree T = S
s∈ω Ts is computable.
We turn the tree T into a class of structures. The language L consists
of unary predicates Un for n ∈ω. In each L-structure A, we have inﬁnitely
many elements a representing each isolated path f in T, in that if f(n) = 0,
then A |= ¬Una and if f(n) = 1, then A |= Una.
We can give a computable set of axioms for the elementary ﬁrst order
theory of these structures. For σ ∈T, we have a ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free
formula σ(x) that is the conjunction of Unx for σ(n) = 1 and ¬Unx for
σ(n) = 0. For each n, we have a ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free formula Tn(x) that
is the disjunction over σ ∈T ∩2n of the formulas σ(x). Consider the axioms
(∀x)Tn(x) for all n and (∃≥nx)σ(x) for σ ∈T. Let T ∗be the theory generated
by these axioms.
The countable models of T ∗all have inﬁnitely many elements represent-
ing each isolated path. In addition, they may have one or more elements
representing the non-isolated path. To see that the axioms generate a com-
plete theory, we note that any ﬁnitary sentence mentions only ﬁnitely many
Um, say for m < n. The reducts of the various countable models of T ∗to
this smaller language are all isomorphic.
Consider the model of T ∗with no elements representing the non-isolated
path. Clearly, this model has a computable copy A with universe A = ω.
To see this, computably partition the set A into inﬁnitely many inﬁnite,
computable sets. For each σ ∈T, consider the inﬁnite path composed of σ
followed by all 0’s; assign all of the elements a from one of the inﬁnite sets
in the partition to this path. Note that if σi isolates the path represented
by ai, then the conjunction of the formulas giving the equalities on the ai
and the formulas σi generates the complete elementary ﬁrst order type of ¯a.
Moreover, since the language has only unary predicates, this formula actu-
ally deﬁnes the orbit of ¯a. Similarly, for any model D of T ∗, A is isomorphic


12
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
to an elementary substructure of D, and any mapping that sends each ele-
ment a ∈A to an element d ∈D representing the same isolated path is an
elementary embedding.
Let B be the model of T ∗with just one element b representing the non-
isolated path. We write A for the substructure of B isomorphic to the struc-
ture A above. We want to show that any computable Π2 sentence true of
A is true of B. It is enough to show that any computable Σ2 sentence true
of B is true of A. Take a computable Σ2 sentence ϕ = W(∃¯ui)ϕi(¯ui) true of
B. Say B |= ϕi(b, ¯a), where ϕi(x, ¯v) is computable Π1, ¯ui = x, ¯v. Let δ(¯v)
be a ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free formula generating the type of ¯a. Let p(x, ¯v)
be the c.e. set of ﬁnitary universal conjuncts of ϕi(¯ui). Let Γ consist of the
computable set of axioms for T ∗, plus δ(¯c), plus p(d, ¯c).
Let f be the non-isolated path through T. We cannot have Γ ⊢σ(d), for
all ﬁnite σ ⊆f, since then f would be computable. So, for some σ ⊆f,
Γ ∪{¬σ(d)} has a model C, where the elements of ¯c and d necessarily all
represent isolated paths. Now, by what we noted above, the reduct of C to
the language L has an elementary substructure isomorphic to A, and we
may suppose that ¯c and d are in this elementary substructure, and that ¯a
is mapped to ¯c. Therefore, for the element a′ mapped to d, A |= ϕi(a′, ¯a),
as required.
The next result gives conditions suﬃcient to guarantee that a computable
structure has a computable Πα+1 Scott sentence.
Proposition 2.9. Let α ≥1 be a computable ordinal. Suppose A is a com-
putable structure, and there is a Σα Scott family Φ consisting of computable
Σα formulas, with no parameters. Then A has a computable Πα+1 Scott
sentence.
Proof. We can prove the following.
Claim: There is a computable function taking each tuple ¯c to a computable
Σα formula ϕ¯c(¯x) that deﬁnes the orbit of ¯c.
Proof of Claim. Let a be a notation for α (see [1] for a technical exposition
of Kleene’s system of notations for computable ordinals). We may suppose
that all elements of Φ have indices of the form (Σ, a, e). Let R be the Σα re-
lation consisting of pairs (¯c, e) such that the formula ψ¯c,e with index (Σ, a, e)
is an element of Φ that is true of ¯c. We can construct a computable sequence
of computable Σα formulas τ¯c,e, deﬁned for all ¯c and all e, built up out of
⊤and ⊥, such that τ¯c,e is logically equivalent to ⊤if (¯c, e) ∈R and to


Complexity of Scott Sentences
13
⊥otherwise. We let ϕ¯c(¯x) be the disjunction over all e, of the formulas
τ¯c,e & ψ¯c,e(¯x).
Using the formulas ϕ¯c(¯x) from the Claim, we can build a computable
Πα+1 Scott sentence as Scott did. We take the conjunction of the computable
Σα sentence ϕ∅and the computable Πα+1 sentences ρ¯a saying
(∀¯x)[ϕ¯a(¯x) →((∀y)
_
b
ϕ¯a,b(¯x, y) &
^
b
(∃y)ϕ¯a,b(¯x, y))] .
Recall that in an example above, we showed that for a computable or-
dering of type ωω, the orbits of all tuples are deﬁned by computable Σ<ω
formulas, but there is no Πω Scott sentence.
3
Varying the results of A. Miller and D.
Miller
A. Miller [9] proved that for a countable ordinal α ≥2, if A has a Σα Scott
sentence and a Πα Scott sentence, then it has one that is d-Σ<α. We say a
little about A. Miller’s proof. The case where α is a limit ordinal is trivial;
in fact, if A has a Σα Scott sentence ϕ, then there is a Σ<α Scott sentence.
The sentence ϕ is a countable disjunction of formulas ϕi, each of which is
Σ<α. One of the disjuncts ϕi is true in A, and this is a Σ<α Scott sentence.
The interesting case is as follows.
Theorem 3.1 (A. Miller). For a countable ordinal α ≥1, if A has a Scott
sentence that is Πα+1 and one that is Σα+1, then it has one that is d-Σα.
Sketch of proof. A. Miller used a result of D. Miller [10] saying that for
disjoint sets A, B ⊆Mod(L) both axiomatized by Πα+1 sentences, there is
a separator (i.e., a set containing A and disjoint from B) that is a countable
union of sets axiomatized by d-Σα sentences. Suppose that A has Scott
sentences ϕ and ψ, where ϕ is Πα+1 and ψ is Σα+1. Applying the result
of D. Miller to the disjoint sets A = Mod(ϕ) and B = Mod(neg(ψ)), we
get a separator which is Mod(γ) for some sentence γ which is a countable
disjunction of d-Σα sentences. Since Mod(neg(ψ)) is the complement of
Mod(ϕ) in Mod(L), Mod(γ) = Mod(ϕ); so γ is a Scott sentence for A.
Thus, A satisﬁes one of the disjuncts of γ, and this is also a Scott sentence
for A.


14
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
Our goal is to prove the following.
Theorem 3.2. For a computable ordinal α ≥2, if A has a Scott sentence
that is computable Πα and one that is computable Σα, then there is one that
is computable d-Σ<α.
Again, the case where α is a limit ordinal is trivial. We want to prove
that if A has one Scott sentence that is computable Πα+1 and another that
is computable Σα+1, then there is one that is computable d-Σα.
D. Miller gave an eﬀective version of his separation theorem, saying that
if A and B are disjoint subsets of Mod(L), axiomatized by Πα+1 sentences
in the admissible fragment LωCK
1
, then there is a separator that is a disjoint
union of sets axiomatized by d-Σα formulas in LωCK
1
. This is not good enough
for our purposes. We give a direct proof of the following.
Lemma 3.3 (Main Lemma). Let α ≥1 be a computable ordinal. If A has
a computable Σα+1 Scott sentence ϕ and a computable Πα+1 Scott sentence
ψ, then there is a computable d-Σα Scott sentence.
Proof. The sentence ϕ has the form W
i∈W(∃¯ui)ϕi(¯ui), where each ϕi is com-
putable Πα, and W is a c.e. set. For some i and some ¯a, we have A |= ϕi(¯a).
By Theorem 2.6, the orbit of ¯a is deﬁned by a computable Σα formula γ(¯u).
Note that (∃¯u)γ(¯u) is computable Σα, and (∀¯u)(γ(¯u) →ϕi(¯u)) is logically
equivalent to a computable Πα sentence. The conjunction of these is a Scott
sentence for A.
Below, we give an eﬀective version of D. Miller’s result, which would
suﬃce to prove Theorem 3.2.
Theorem 3.4. Let L be a computable language. For a computable ordinal
α ≥2, suppose A and B are disjoint subsets of Mod(L) axiomatized by
computable Πα sentences. Then then there is a separator that is the union
of a countable family of sets each of which is axiomatized by a computable
d-Σ<α sentence.
Proof. Let A = Mod(ϕ), and let B = Mod(ψ), where ϕ and ψ are com-
putable Πα sentences. Say that ϕ = V
i∈W(∀¯ui)ϕi(¯ui), where W is a c.e.
set, and each ϕi(¯ui) has the form W
j∈Wei(∃¯vi,j)ξi,j(¯ui, ¯vi,j), where each ξi,j
is Πβ for some β such that β + 1 < α, and each Wei is a c.e. set whose in-
dex ei (according to some canonical indexing of the c.e. sets) is determined
computably from the index i of ϕi.


Complexity of Scott Sentences
15
Let C be an inﬁnite computable set of new Henkin constants, corre-
sponding to the natural numbers. For each A ∈A, let CA be the consis-
tency property consisting of the ﬁnite sets S of sentences in the language
L ∪C, each computable Σβ or Πβ for some β such that β + 1 < α (and
each, recall, obtained by substituting constants from C for the free variables
in a computable Lω1ω formula in normal form), where some interpretation
of the constants from C appearing in the sentences of S, mapping distinct
constants to distinct elements of A, makes all of these sentences true. Recall
the special computable Πα sentence ϕ and its sub-formulas, ϕi and ξi,j. The
set CA is a consistency property C satisfying the following condition:
⋆For each S ∈C, for each i ∈W and each appropriate ¯c, there exist j ∈
Wei and an appropriate ¯d such that for some S′ ⊇S in C, ξi,j(¯c, ¯d) ∈S′.
For any consistency property C satisfying ⋆, there is a chain (Sn)n∈ω of
elements of C such that {Sn : n ∈ω} is also a consistency property satisfying
⋆. For any such chain, the resulting structure is a model of ϕ.
We now consider the other special computable Πα sentence ψ. Say that
ψ = V
i∈W ′(∀¯ui)ψi(¯ui), where W ′ is a c.e. set, and for each i, ψi(¯ui) =
W
j∈Wei(∃¯vj)θi,j(¯ui, ¯vj), where θi,j is Πβ for some β such that β + 1 < α,
and each Wei is a c.e. set whose index ei (according to some canonical
indexing of the c.e. sets) is determined computably by the index i of ϕi.
Since A = Mod(ϕ) and B = Mod(ψ) are disjoint subsets of Mod(L), for
any A satisfying ϕ, CA cannot satisfy the following added condition, which
would witness the truth of ψ:
⋆⋆For each S ∈C, for all i ∈W ′ and all ¯c appropriate for ¯ui, there exists
S′ ⊇S such that for some j ∈Wei and ¯d, we have θi,j(¯c, ¯d) ∈S′.
It follows that there must exist S ∈CA, and some i and ¯c appropriate
for ¯ui, such that for all j in the c.e. set Wei and all ¯d, S ∪{θi,j(¯c, ¯d)} is not
satisﬁed by any assignment in A. Let ¯c′ be the tuple of constants from C,
other than ¯c, that appear in S, and let χ(¯c, ¯c′) be the conjunction of S and
sentences expressing that the tuples ¯c, ¯c′ are disjoint and the elements of ¯c′
are distinct.
Now, although ¯c is appropriate for the tuple of variables ¯ui, it might be
that the tuple ¯c assigns the same constant to multiple variables; i.e, the
tuple ¯c could list the same constant multiple times. Therefore, to deﬁne
χ(¯ui, ¯x) unambiguously, for a given constant in ¯c, substitute the variable
from ¯ui with least index to which this element of ¯c was assigned. Finally,


16
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
let ρ(¯ui, ¯x) be the conjunction of χ(¯ui, ¯x) and formulas that express the
pairwise equality of any elements of ¯ui to which the same constant in ¯c was
assigned, and the pairwise inequality of any elements of ¯ui to which diﬀerent
constants in ¯c were assigned. Then
A |= (∀¯ui)[((∃¯x)ρ(¯ui, ¯x)) →(
^
j∈Wei
(∀¯vi,j)(neg(θi,j(¯ui, ¯vi,j))))]
.
Note that (∃¯ui¯x)ρ(¯ui, ¯x) is computable Σ<α, and
(∀¯ui)[((∃¯x)ρ(¯ui, ¯x)) →(
^
j∈Wei
(∀¯vi,j)(neg(θi,j(¯ui, ¯vi,j))))]
is logically equivalent to a computable Π<α sentence. Both sentences are true
in A. They cannot both be true in any model of ψ, for then there would be
a tuple satisfying neg(ψi(¯ui)). The conjunction gives a computable d-Σ<α
sentence that is true in A and not true in any model of ψ. Let MA be the
class of models for this sentence. As our separator, we take the union of the
sets MA. While there may be uncountably many models A of ϕ, there are
only countably many pairs of computable inﬁnitary sentences. Hence, our
separator is the union of a countable family of sets SA.
4
Finitely generated groups
Knight and Saraph [8] observed that every computable ﬁnitely generated
group has a computable Σ3 Scott sentence. However, for many kinds of
computable ﬁnitely generated groups, there is a computable d-Σ2 Scott sen-
tence. In particular, this is so for ﬁnitely generated free groups [3], ﬁnitely
generated Abelian groups, the inﬁnite dihedral group of rank 2 [8], further
variants of the dihedral group [12], polycyclic groups, and certain groups
of interest in geometric group theory (lamplighter and Baumslag-Solitar
groups) [5]. Based on the known examples, Ho and Knight had conjectured
that every computable ﬁnitely generated group has a computable d-Σ2 Scott
sentence. Knight also conjectured that every ﬁnitely generated group (not
necessarily computable) has a d-Σ2 Scott sentence (not necessarily com-
putable d-Σ2). Recently, Harrison-Trainor and Ho [4] gave an example of a
computable ﬁnitely generated group that does not have a d-Σ2 Scott sen-
tence, thereby disproving both conjectures.
Here we give necessary and suﬃcient conditions for a ﬁnitely generated
group to have a d-Σ2 Scott sentence. We also give necessary and suﬃcient


Complexity of Scott Sentences
17
conditions for a computable ﬁnitely generated group to have a computable
d-Σ2 Scott sentence. We show that for a ﬁnitely generated group, there
is a d-Σ2 Scott sentence iﬀfor some generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned
by a Π1 formula iﬀfor each generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned by a Π1
formula. For a computable ﬁnitely generated group, there is a computable
d-Σ2 Scott sentence iﬀfor some generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned by a
computable Π1 formula iﬀfor each generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned by
a computable Π1 formula.
4.1
Finitely generated groups with a d-Σ2 Scott sen-
tence
In [8], it is observed that a computable ﬁnitely generated group has a com-
putable Σ3 Scott sentence. Throughout the rest of this section, we use the
notation ⟨¯x⟩∼= ⟨¯y⟩to represent the computable Π1 formula that says ¯x and
¯y satisfy the exact same relators and non-relators. Note that if ¯a is a ﬁxed
tuple of a group G, then the set of relators and non-relators satisﬁed by ¯a is
a set computable in G. The notation ⟨¯x⟩∼= ⟨¯a⟩represents the conjunction
of the formulas of the forms ¯w(¯x) = 1 and ¯w(¯x) ̸= 1 that are true of ¯a
in A. This formula should not be thought of as including ¯a as parameters;
instead, it represents a Π1 formula in ¯x.
Proposition 4.1. Every ﬁnitely generated group has a Σ3 Scott sentence.
Proof. Let G be a group with generating tuple ¯a. As in [8], we get a Scott
sentence saying that (∃¯x)[⟨¯x⟩∼= ⟨¯a⟩& (∀y) W
w w(¯x) = y].
We can prove the following.
Theorem 4.2. For a ﬁnitely generated group G, the following are equiva-
lent:
1. G has a Π3 Scott sentence,
2. G has a d-Σ2 Scott sentence
3. for some generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned by a Π1 formula
4. for each generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned by a Π1 formula.
Proof. Clearly, (2) ⇒(1). Using the result of A. Miller, together with the
fact that G has a Σ3 Scott sentence, we get (1) ⇒(2). To complete the
proof, we will show that (1) ⇒(4) ⇒(3) ⇒(1). For (1) ⇒(4), suppose


18
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
G has a Π3 Scott sentence, and let ¯a be a generating tuple. By the result
of Montalb´an, the orbit of ¯a is deﬁned by a computable Σ2 formula ϕ(¯x) =
W
i(∃¯ui)ϕi(¯x, ¯ui), where ϕi is Π1. Take i and ¯b such that G |= ϕi(¯a,¯b). For
some tuple of words ¯w, G |= ¯w(¯a) = ¯b. Then the orbit of ¯a is deﬁned by
the Π1 formula ϕi(¯x, ¯w(¯x)). Clearly, (4) ⇒(3). To show that (3) ⇒(1),
suppose ¯a is a generating tuple with orbit deﬁned by a Π1 formula ψ(¯u).
We show that for all tuples ¯b, the orbit is deﬁned by a Σ2 formula. Suppose
G |= ¯b = ¯w(¯a). Then the orbit of ¯b is deﬁned by the Σ2-formula ϕ(¯x) =
(∃¯u)(ψ(¯u) & ¯x = ¯w(¯u)). Then by the result of Montalb´an, G has a Π3 Scott
sentence.
In this proof of Theorem 4.2 above, we used Miller’s result to show that
if G has a Π3 Scott sentence, then it has a d-Σ2 Scott sentence. There is an
alternative proof, using the following result of Ho [5].
Lemma 4.3 (Generating Set Lemma). Let G be a computable ﬁnitely gen-
erated group, and suppose ϕ(¯x) is a computable Σ2 formula, satisﬁed in G,
such that all tuples satisfying ϕ(¯x) generate G. Then G has a computable
d-Σ2 Scott sentence.
Proof. Let G = ⟨¯a⟩, where ¯a satisﬁes the formula ϕ(¯x).
Ho’s Scott sentence is the conjunction of the following:
1. the computable Π2 sentence saying (∀¯x)[ϕ(¯x) →(∀y) W
w w(¯x) = y],
2. the computable Σ2 sentence saying (∃¯x)[ϕ(¯x) & ⟨¯x⟩∼= ⟨¯a⟩].
We automatically have the following non-eﬀective analogue of Ho’s re-
sult.
Lemma 4.4. Suppose G is a ﬁnitely generated group, and there is a Σ2
formula ϕ(¯x), satisﬁed in G, and such that all tuples satisfying ϕ(¯x) generate
G. Then G has a d-Σ2 Scott sentence.
Alternative proof of Theorem 4.2. If there is a Π3 Scott sentence, then by
the result of Montalb´an, there is a Σ2 formula deﬁning the orbit of a gener-
ating tuple. Then by the analogue of the result of Ho, there is a d-Σ2 Scott
sentence.


Complexity of Scott Sentences
19
4.2
Computable ﬁnitely generated groups with a com-
putable d-Σ2 Scott sentence
In [8], it is observed that every computable group has a computable Σ3
Scott sentence. We can prove the following.
Theorem 4.5. For a computable ﬁnitely generated group G, the following
are equivalent:
1. there is a computable Π3 Scott sentence,
2. there is a computable d-Σ2 Scott sentence,
3. for some generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned by a computable Π1
formula,
4. for each generating tuple, the orbit is deﬁned by a computable Π1 for-
mula.
Proof. We show that (2) ⇒(1) ⇒(4) ⇒(3) ⇒(2). For (2) ⇒(1), we note
that a computable d-Σ2 Scott sentence may be regarded as a computable
Π3 Scott sentence. For (1) ⇒(4), if G has a computable Π3 Scott sentence,
and ¯a is a generating tuple, then by Theorem 2.6, the orbit of ¯a is deﬁned
by a computable Σ2 formula ϕ(¯x) = W
i∈W(∃¯ui)ϕi(¯x, ¯ui), where each ϕi
is computable Π1, and W is some c.e. set. For some i ∈W and some ¯b,
G |= ϕi(¯a,¯b). For some tuple of words ¯w, G |= ¯w(¯a) = ¯b. Then the orbit of ¯a
is deﬁned by the computable Π1 formula ϕi(¯x, ¯w(¯x)). Clearly, (4) ⇒(3). For
(3) ⇒(2), let ¯a be a generating tuple whose orbit is deﬁned by a computable
Π1 formula. We may regard this as a computable Σ2 formula. By the result
of Ho, G has a computable d-Σ2 Scott sentence.
4.3
Example of Harrison-Trainor and Ho
Ho and Harrison-Trainor [4] gave the deﬁnition below. They considered not
just ﬁnitely generated groups, but more general ﬁnitely generated struc-
tures. We consider only groups.
Deﬁnition 2 (Harrison-Trainor-Ho). A ﬁnitely generated group G is self-
reﬂective if there is a generating tuple ¯a and a tuple ¯b generating a proper
subgroup H, such that
(G, ¯a) ∼= (H,¯b)
and every existential formula true of ¯b in G is true of ¯b in H.


20
R. Alvir, J. F. Knight, and C. McCoy
Proposition 4.6. Let G be a ﬁnitely generated group. Then G is self-
reﬂective iﬀthere is a generating tuple ¯a whose orbit is not deﬁned by a
Π1 formula.
Proof. ⇒Suppose that G is self-reﬂective, witnessed by ¯a and ¯b, where ¯a
generates G, ¯b generates a proper subgroup H, and all existential formulas
true of ¯b in G are also true of ¯b in H. Since (G, ¯a) ∼= (H,¯b), these existential
formulas are also true of ¯a in G. Therefore, the universal formulas true of
¯a in G are also true of ¯b in G. This means that any Π1 formula true of ¯a is
also true of ¯b. Then the orbit of ¯a is not deﬁned by a Π1 formula.
⇐Suppose that G is generated by a tuple ¯a whose orbit is not deﬁned by
a Π1 formula. Let ϕ(¯x) be the Π1 formula obtained as the conjunction of the
universal formulas true of ¯a. There must be some ¯b satisfying ϕ(¯x) and not
generating G. Let H be the subgroup generated by ¯b. Then (G, ¯a) ∼= (H,¯b),
and all existential formulas true of ¯b in G are true of ¯a in G and hence true
of ¯b in H. This means that G is self-reﬂective.
Harrison-Trainor and Ho constructed a computable ﬁnitely generated
group G that is self-reﬂective. They also showed that for any such group,
the index set is m-complete Σ0
3. In this way, they arrived at the fact that
their group G has no computable d-Σ2 Scott sentence. Relativizing, they got
the fact that for any set X, the set of X-computable indices for copies of
G is m-complete Σ0
3 relative to X, so there is no X-computable d-Σ2 Scott
sentence. It follows that the group G has no d-Σ2 Scott sentence.
5
Problems
1. Is there a ﬁnitely presented group that is self-reﬂective?
2. Is there a precise sense in which most ﬁnitely generated groups are
not self-reﬂective? Can we say in terms of limiting density that the
typical ﬁnitely generated group has a d-Σ2 Scott sentence?
3. Is there a computable ﬁnitely generated group with a d-Σ2 Scott sen-
tence but no computable d-Σ2 Scott sentence?
4. Give necessary and suﬃcient conditions for a computable structure A
to have a computable Πα+1 Scott sentence.


Complexity of Scott Sentences
21
References
[1] C. J. Ash and J. F. Knight, Computable Structures and the Hyperarith-
metical Hierarchy, Elsevier, 2000.
[2] S. Badaev, “Computable enumerations of families of general recursive
functions”, Algebra and Logic, vol. 16(1977), pp. 83-98.
[3] J. Carson, V. Harizanov, J. Knight, K. Lange, C. Maher, C. McCoy, A.
Morozov, S. Quinn, and J. Wallbaum, “Describing free groups”, TAMS,
vol. 364(2012), pp. 5715-5728.
[4] M. Harrison-Trainor and M-C Ho, “Finitely generated groups”, pre-
print.
[5] M-C Ho, “Describing groups”, PAMS, to appear in PAMS.
[6] H. J. Keisler, Model Theory for Inﬁnitary Logic, North-Holland, 1971.
[7] J. F. Knight and H. J. Keisler, “Barwise: inﬁnitary logic and admissible
sets”, Bull. Symbolic Logic, vol. 10(2004), pp. 4-36.
[8] J. F. Knight and V. Saraph, “Scott sentences for certain groups”, to
appear in Archive for Math. Logic.
[9] A. Miller, “The Borel classiﬁcation of the isomorphism class of a count-
able model”, NDJFL, vol. 24(1983), pp. 22-34.
[10] D. E. Miller, “The invariant Π0
α separation principle”, TAMS, vol.
242(1978), pp. 185-204.
[11] A. Montalb´an, “A robuster Scott rank”, PAMS, vol. 143(2015), pp.
5427-5436.
[12] A. Raz, “Index sets of some computable groups”, honors thesis, Welles-
ley College, 2014, http://repository.wellesley.edu/thesiscollection/223/
[13] D. Scott, “Logic with denumerably long formulas and ﬁnite strings of
quantiﬁers”, in The Theory of Models, ed. by J. Addition, L. Henkin,
and A. Tarski, 1965, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 329-341.
[14] M. Vanden Boom, “The eﬀective Borel hierarchy”, Fund. Math., vol.
195(2007), pp. 269-289.
[15] R. L. Vaught, “Invariant sets in topology and logic”, Fund. Math., vol.
82(1974), pp. 269-294.
