arXiv:1412.3842v1  [math.LO]  11 Dec 2014
Degree Spectra of Relations on a Cone
Matthew Harrison-Trainor
Group in Logic and the Methodology of Science
University of California, Berkeley
USA 94720
matthew.h-t@berkeley.edu
July 7, 2021


Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Preliminaries
7
2.1
Computability Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Computable Structure Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Relativizing to a Cone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
D.C.E. Degree Spectra
14
3.1
Conditions to be Intrinsically of C.E. Degree . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Incomparable Degree Spectra of D.C.E. Degrees . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Relations on the Naturals
50
5
A “Fullness” Theorem for 2-CEA Degrees
73
5.1
Approximating a 2-CEA Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.2
Basic Framework of the Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3
An Informal Description of the Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.4
The Game Gs and the Final Condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
5.5
Basic Plays and the Basic Game Gb
s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
5.6
The Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.6.1
The case σs+1 ∈T∞
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.6.2
The case σs+1 ∈Tω . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
6
Further Questions
99
A Relativizing Harizanov’s Theorem
102
A.1 Framework of the Proof . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
A.2 The First Two Cases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
A.3 The Third Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
i


Abstract
Let A be a mathematical structure with an additional relation R. We are interested
in the degree spectrum of R, either among computable copies of A when (A,R) is a
“natural” structure, or (to make this rigorous) among copies of (A,R) computable
in a large degree d. We introduce the partial order of degree spectra on a cone and
begin the study of these objects. Using a result of Harizanov—that, assuming an
eﬀectiveness condition on A and R, if R is not intrinsically computable, then its
degree spectrum contains all c.e. degrees—we see that there is a minimal non-trivial
degree spectrum on a cone, consisting of the c.e. degrees. We show that this does
not generalize to d.c.e. degrees by giving an example of two incomparable degree
spectra on a cone. We also give a partial answer to a question of Ash and Knight:
they asked whether (subject to some eﬀectiveness conditions) a relation which is
not intrinsically ∆0
α must have a degree spectrum which contains all of the α-CEA
degrees. We give a positive answer to this question for α = 2 by showing that any
degree spectrum on a cone which strictly contains the ∆0
2 degrees must contain all
of the 2-CEA degrees. We also investigate the particular case of degree spectra on
the structure (ω,<). This work represents the beginning of an investigation of the
degree spectra of “natural” structures, and we leave many open questions to be
answered.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Julia Knight, Alexander Melnikov, Noah Schwe-
ber, and especially Antonio Montalb´an for their helpful comments and conversa-
tions. The author was partially supported by the NSERC PGS D, the NSERC
Julie Payette Research Scholarship, and the Berkeley Fellowship.
ii


Chapter 1
Introduction
The aim of this monograph is to introduce the study of “nice” or “natural” relations
on a computable structure via the technical device of relativizing to a cone of Turing
degrees.
Let A be a mathematical structure, such as a graph, poset, or vector space,
and R ⊆An an additional relation on that structure (i.e., not in the diagram).
The relation R might be the set of nodes of degree three in a graph or the set
of linearly independent pairs in a vector space. The basic question we ask in the
computability-theoretic study of such relations is: how do we measure the com-
plexity of the relation R? One way to measure the complexity of R is the degree
spectrum of R. As is often the case in computability, many examples of relations
with pathological degree spectra have been constructed in the literature but these
tend to require very speciﬁc constructions. In this work, we restrict our attention to
natural relations to capture those structures and relations which tend to show up in
normal mathematical practice. We ﬁnd that the degree spectra of natural relations
are much better behaved than those of arbitrary relations, but not as well-behaved
as one might hope.
The study of relations on a structure began with Ash and Nerode [AN81] who
showed that, given certain assumptions about A and R, the complexity of the
formal deﬁnition of R in the logic Lω1ω is related to its intrinsic computability. For
example, R has a computable Σn deﬁnition if and only if R is intrinsically Σn, that
is, for any computable copy B of A, the copy of R in B is Σn.
Harizanov [Har87] introduced the degree spectrum of R to capture a ﬁner picture
of the relation’s complexity. The degree spectrum of R is the collection of all Turing
degrees of copies of the relation R inside computable copies B of A. The degree
spectra of particular relations have been frequently studied, particularly with the
goal of ﬁnding as many possible diﬀerent degree spectra as possible. For example,
Harizanov [Har93] has shown that there is a ∆0
2 (but not c.e.) degree a such that
{0,a} is the degree spectrum of a relation. Hirschfeldt [Hir00] has shown that for
any α-c.e. degree b, with α ∈ω ∪{ω}, {0,b} is the degree spectrum of a relation.
Hirschfeldt has also shown that for any c.e. degree c and any computable ordinal α,
1


CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
the set of α-c.e. degrees less than or equal to c is a degree spectrum. A number of
other papers have been published showing that other degree spectra are possible—
see for example Khoussainov and Shore [KS98] and Goncharov and Khoussainov
[GK97].
These results require complicated constructions and one would not expect rela-
tions which one ﬁnds in nature to have such degree spectrum. Instead, we expect
to ﬁnd simpler degree spectra such as the set of all c.e. degrees, the set of all d.c.e.
degrees, or the set of all ∆0
2 degrees. The goal of this paper is to begin to answer
the question of what sorts of degree spectra we should expect to ﬁnd in nature.
Since we cannot formally describe what we mean by a relation found in nature, we
will prove our results relative to a cone. One expects a result which holds on a cone
to hold for any “nice” or “natural” relations and structures because natural prop-
erties tend to relativize. Such structures include vector spaces and algebraically
closed ﬁelds, but not ﬁrst-order arithmetic. We hope to be able to convince the
reader that the study of relations relative to a cone is an interesting and useful way
of approaching the study of relations that one might come across in nature. Our
results are the beginning and there is a large amount of work still to be done. An
interesting picture is already starting to emerge.
We will introduce the deﬁnition, suggested by Montalb´an, of a (relativized)
degree spectrum of a relation. The results in this paper can be viewed as studying
the partial ordering of degree spectra on a cone. The following is a simpliﬁcation
of the full deﬁnition which will come later in Chapter 2.
Deﬁnition 1.1 (Montalb´an). Let A and B be structures with relations R and S
respectively. We say that R and S have the same degree spectrum “on a cone” if,
for all sets C on a cone,
{d(R
˜
A ⊕C) ∶˜
A ≅A and ˜
A ≤T C} = {d(S
˜
B ⊕C) ∶˜B ≅B and ˜B ≤T C}
where d(D) is the Turing degree of the set D.
We are particularly interested in whether or not there are “fullness” results
for particular types of degree spectra, by which we mean results which say that
degree spectra on a cone must contain many degrees.
This is in opposition to
the pathological examples of many small (even two-element) degree spectra that
can be constructed when not working on a cone.
There are a small number of
previous “fullness” results, though not in the language which we use here, starting
with Harizanov [Har91] who proved that (assuming (∗) below), as soon as a degree
spectrum contains more than the computable degree, it must contain all c.e. degrees:
Theorem 1.2 (Harizanov [Har91, Theorem 2.5]). Let A be a computable structure
and R a computable relation on A which is not relatively intrinsically computable.
Suppose moreover that the eﬀectiveness condition (∗) holds of A and R. Then for
every c.e. set C, there is a computable copy B of A such that RB ≡T C.
(∗) For every ¯a, we can computably ﬁnd a ∈R such that for all ¯b and quantiﬁer-
free formulas θ(¯z,x, ¯y) such that A ⊧θ(¯a,a,¯b), there are a′ ∉R and ¯b′ such
that A ⊧θ(¯a,a′,¯b′)


CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
3
The result is stated using the eﬀectiveness condition (∗) which says that R
must be a nice relation in some particular way. When we relativize to a cone, the
eﬀectiveness condition trivializes and we are left with the statement:
Corollary 1.3 (Harizanov). Relative to a cone, every degree spectrum either is the
computable degree, or contains all c.e. degrees.
This result stands in contrast to the state of our knowledge of degree spectra when
not working on a cone, where we know almost no restrictions on what sets of degrees
may be degree spectra.
Ash and Knight tried to generalize Harizanov’s result in the papers [AK95] and
[AK97]. They wanted to replace “c.e.” by “Σ0
α”. In our language of degree spectra
on a cone, they wanted to show that every degree spectrum is either contained in
the the ∆α degrees or contains all of the Σα degrees. However, they discovered
that this was false: there is a computable structure A with a computable relation
R where R is intrinsically Σα, not intrinsically ∆0
α, and for any computable copy
B, RB is α-CEA. Moreover, the proof of this relativizes.
So instead of asking whether “c.e.” can be replaced by Σ0
α, Ash and Knight
asked whether “c.e.” can be replaced by “α-CEA”. A set S is n-CEA if there are
sets S0,S1,S2,... ,Sn = S such that S0 is c.e., S1 is c.e. in and above S0, S2 is c.e.
in and above S1, and so on. For now, the reader can ignore what this means for
an inﬁnite ordinal α (the deﬁnition in general will follow in Chapter 2). Ash and
Knight were able to show that Harizanov’s result can be extended in this manner
when the coding is done relative to a ∆0
α-complete set (note that, modulo ∆0
α, every
Σ0
α set is α-CEA):
Theorem 1.4 (Ash-Knight [AK97, Theorem 2.1]). Let A be an α-friendly com-
putable structure with an additional computable relation R. Suppose that R is not
relatively intrinsically ∆0
α and moreover, for all ¯c, we can ﬁnd a ∉R which is ef-
fectively α-free over ¯c. Then for any Σ0
α set C, there is a computable copy B of A
such that
RB ⊕∆0
α ≡T C ⊕∆0
α
where ∆0
α is a ∆0
α-complete set.
But this theorem is not enough to show that, on a cone, every degree spectrum
is either contained in the the ∆α degrees or contains all of the α-CEA degrees.
A much better result, and one which would be suﬃcient, would be to show that
RB ≡T C rather than RB ⊕∆0
α ≡T C ⊕∆0
α. This was the goal of Knight in [Kni98]
where she showed that it could be done with strong assumptions on the relation
R, namely that one could ﬁnd α-free elements which did not interfere with each
other too much. The general question, without these strong assumptions, was left
unresolved.
One of our main results in this paper in Chapter 5 is a positive answer to this
question in the case α = 2.
Theorem 1.5. Let A be a structure, and let R be an additional relation. Suppose
that R is not intrinsically ∆0
2 on any cone. Then, on a cone, the degree spectrum
of R contains the 2-CEA sets.


CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
The proof uses an interesting method which we have not seen before and which we
think is of independent interest. We will describe the method brieﬂy here. During
the construction, we are presented with two possible choices of how to continue,
but it is not clear which will work. We are able to show that one of the two choices
must work, but in order to ﬁnd out which choice it is we must consider a game in
which we play out the rest of the construction against an opponent who attempts
to make the construction fail. By ﬁnding a winning strategy for this game, we are
able to decide which choice to make.
Up to this point, degree spectra on a cone are looking very well-behaved, and in
fact one might start to hope that they are linearly ordered. However, this is not the
case as we see by considering Ershov’s hierarchy. Suppose (once again working on
a cone) that there is a computable copy B such that RB is not of c.e. degree. Is it
necessarily the case that for every d.c.e. set W, there is a computable copy C such
that RC ≡T W? We will show in Chapter 3 that this is not the case. Moreover, we
will show that there is a computable structure A with relatively intrinsically d.c.e.
relations R and S which have incomparable degree spectra relative to every oracle.
Theorem 1.6. There is a computable structure A and relatively intrinsically d.c.e.
relations R and S such that neither R nor S are intrinsically of c.e. degree, even
relative to any cone, and the degree spectra of R and S are incomparable relative
to any cone (i.e., the degree spectrum of R is not contained in that of S, and vice
versa).
In proving this, we will also give a structural condition equivalent to being
intrinsically of c.e. degree (which, as far as we are aware, is a new deﬁnition; we
mean that in any computable copy, the relation has c.e. degree). The structural
condition works for relations which are intrinsically d.c.e., and it does not seem
diﬃcult to extend it to work in more general cases.
The following is a summary of all that we know about the possible degree spectra
of relations on a cone:
(1) there is a smallest degree spectrum: the computable degree,
(2) there is a smallest degree spectrum strictly containing the computable degree:
the c.e. degrees (Corollary 1.3, see [Har91]),
(3) there are two incomparable degree spectra both strictly containing the c.e.
degrees and strictly contained in the d.c.e. degrees (Theorem 1.5),
(4) any degree spectrum strictly containing the ∆0
2 degrees must contain all of
the 2-CEA degrees (Theorem 1.6).
Figure 1.1 gives a graphical representation of all that is known. There are many
more questions to be asked about degree spectra on a cone. In general, at least
at the lower levels, there seem to be far fewer degree spectra on a cone than there
are degrees (or degree spectra not on a cone). We expect this pattern to continue.
However, an interesting phenomenon is that not all degree spectra are “named”
(e.g., as the Σ0
1 or ∆0
2 degrees are), though perhaps this is just because we do not


CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
5
understand enough about them to name them. The hope would be to classify and
name all of the possible degree spectra.
∆0
3
∆0
2
d.c.e.
2-CEA
●
●
Σ0
1
✎
✕
✚
✤
✩
✯
✴
✴
✯
✩
✤✚
✕
✎
∆0
1
Figure 1.1: A visual summary of everything we know so far (including results from
this paper) about the possible degree spectra of relations on a cone. The possible
degree spectra are labeled or contained within one of the two enclosed areas (i.e.,
between Σ0
1 and ∆0
2, or above 2-CEA). The two strictly d.c.e. degrees shown are
incomparable.
In this paper, we will also consider the special case of the structure (ω,<). This
special case has been studied previously by Downey, Khoussainov, Miller, and Yu
[DKMY09], Knoll [Kno09], and Wright [Wri13]. Knoll showed that for the standard
copy of (ω,<), the degree spectrum of any unary relation which is not intrinsically
computable consists of exactly the ∆0
2 degrees. So while the counterexamples of
Theorem 1.6 exist in general, such counterexamples may not exist for particular
structures. Wright [Wri13] later independently found this same result about unary
relations, and also showed that for n-ary relations on (ω,<), any degree spectrum
which contains a non-computable set contains all c.e. sets. In Chapter 4, we begin
an investigation of what the partial order of degree spectra on a cone looks like when
we restrict ourselves to relations on (ω,<). We show that every relation which is
intrinsically α-c.e. is intrinsically of c.e. degree. We also introduce the notion of
what it means for a relation to uniformly have its degree spectrum, and show that
either
(1) there is a computable relation R on (ω,<) whose degree spectrum strictly
contains the c.e. degrees but does not contain all of the d.c.e. degrees, or


CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
6
(2) there is a computable relation R on (ω,<) whose degree spectrum is all of the
∆0
2 degrees but does not have this degree spectrum uniformly.
Both (1) and (2) are interesting situations, and one or the other must occur. It
seems likely, but very diﬃcult to show, that (1) occurs.
In this monograph, we would like to advocate for this program of studying degree
spectra on a cone. We hope that some of the results in this paper will support the
position that this is a fruitful view. We believe that the study of degree spectra on
a cone is interesting beyond the characterization of the degree spectra of naturally
occurring structures. Even when considering structures in general, knowing which
results can and cannot be proven on a cone is still illuminating. If a result holds
in the computable case, but not on a cone, then that means that the result relies
in some way on the computable presentation of the original structure (for example,
diagonalization arguments can often be used to produce pathological examples;
such arguments tend not to relativize). Understanding why certain a result holds
for computable structures but fails on a cone is a way of understanding the essential
character of the proof of that result.
We will begin by making some preliminary deﬁnitions in Chapter 2. In Chapter
3, we will consider d.c.e. degrees. We begin by introducing the notion of being
intrinsically of c.e. degree and give a characterization of such relations. We then
prove Theorem 1.6. In Chapter 4, we apply some of the results from Chapter 3
to the structure (ω,<) and study the degree spectra of such relations. Chapter
5 is devoted to the proof of Theorem 1.5 on 2-CEA degrees. Finally, in Chapter
6 we will state some interesting open questions and describe what we see as the
future of this program. We also include a discussion of the technical details around
the deﬁnition of degree spectra on a cone, in particular in relation to relativizing
Harizanov’s results on c.e. degrees, in Appendix A.


Chapter 2
Preliminaries
In this chapter, we will introduce some background from computability theory and
computable structure theory before formally deﬁning what we mean by “on a cone.”
2.1
Computability Theory
We will assume that the reader has a general knowledge of computability theory.
For the most part, the reader will not need to know about computable ordinals.
Occasionally we will state general questions involving a computable ordinal α, but
the reader should feel free to assume that α is a ﬁnite number n. See Chapter 4 of
[AK00] for a reference on computable ordinals.
There are two classes of sets which will come up frequently which we will deﬁne
here. Ershov’s hierarchy [Erˇs68a, Erˇs68b, Erˇs70] generalizes the c.e. and d.c.e. sets
to classify sets by how many times their computable approximation is allowed to
change.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Ershov’s hierarchy). A set X is α-c.e. if there are functions g ∶
ω × ω →{0,1} and n ∶ω × ω →{β ∶β ≤α} such that for all x and s,
(1) g(x,0) = 0,
(2) n(x,0) = α,
(3) n(x,s + 1) ≤n(x,s),
(4) if g(x,s + 1) ≠g(x,s) then n(x,s + 1) < n(x,s), and
(5) lims→∞g(x,s) = X(x).
The function g guesses at whether x ∈X, with n counting the number of changes.
We could instead have made the following equivalent deﬁnition:
7


CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARIES
8
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Ershov’s hierarchy, alternate deﬁnition). X is α-c.e. if there are
uniformly c.e. families (Aβ)β<α and (Bβ)β<α such that
X = ⋃
β<α
(Aβ −⋃
γ<β
Bγ)
and if x ∈Aβ ∩Bβ, then x ∈Aγ ∪Bγ for some γ < β.
See Chapter 5 of [AK00] for more on α-c.e. sets.
A set X is c.e. in and above (CEA in) a set Y if X is c.e. in Y and X ≥T Y . We
can easily generalize this to any ﬁnite n by iterating the deﬁnition: X is n-CEA
in Y if there are X0 = Y,X1,... ,Xn = X such that Xi is CEA in Xi−1 for each
i = 1,... ,n. We can even generalize this to arbitrary α:
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Ash-Knight [AK95]). A set X is α-CEA in a set Y if there is a
sequence (Xβ)β≤α such that
(1) X0 is recursive,
(2) Xβ+1 is CEA in Xβ,
(3) Xβ ≤Xδ for δ > β a limit ordinal,
(4) Xδ is c.e. in ⊕β<δ Xβ, and
(5) Xα = X.
Ash and Knight note that a set which is α-CEA is Σ0
α, but that the converse is
not necessarily true (one can see that this follows from the existence of a minimal
∆0
2 set; a minimal ∆0
2 set is not c.e. and hence not 2-CEA).
2.2
Computable Structure Theory
We will consider only countable structures, so we will say “structure” when we
mean “countable structure.” For an introduction to computable structures as well
as much of the other background, see [AK00]. We view the atomic diagram D(A)
of a structure A as a subset of ω, and usually we will identify A with its diagram. A
computable presentation (or computable copy) B of a structure A is another struc-
ture B with domain ω such that A ≅B and the atomic diagram of B is computable.
The inﬁnitary logic Lω1ω is the logic which allows countably inﬁnite conjunctions
and disjunctions but only ﬁnite quantiﬁcation. If the conjunctions and disjunctions
of a formula ϕ are all over computable sets of indices for formulas, then we say that
ϕ is computable. We use Σin
α and Πin
α to denote the classes of all inﬁnitary Σα and
all Πα formulas respectively. We will also use Σc
α and Πc
α to denote the classes of
computable Σα and Πα formulas. These formulas will often involve ﬁnitely many
constant symbols from the structure. See Chapter 6 of [AK00] for a more complete
description of computable formulas.
By a relation R on a structure A, we mean a subset of An for some n. We
say that R is invariant if it is ﬁxed by all automorphisms of R. It is a theorem,


CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARIES
9
following from the Scott Isomorphism Theorem [Sco65], that a relation is invariant
if and only if it is deﬁned in A by a formula of Lω1ω. All of the relations that
we will consider will be invariant relations. If B is a computable copy of A, then
there is a unique interpretation RB of R in B, either by using the Lω1ω-deﬁnition
of R, or using the invariance of R under automorphisms (so that if f ∶A →B is an
isomorphism, f(R) is a relation on B which does not depend on the choice of the
automorphism f).
The study of invariant relations began with Ash and Nerode [AN81]. They made
the following deﬁnition: if Γ is some property of sets, then R is intrinsically Γ if
among all of the computable copies B of A, RB is Γ. Usually we will talk about
relations which are intrinsically computable (or more generally ∆α), intrinsically
c.e. (or more generally Σα or Πα), intrinsically α-CEA, or intrinsically α-c.e. Ash
and Nerode showed that (making some assumptions on the structure and on the
relation) a relation is intrinsically c.e. if and only if is deﬁned by a Σc
1 formula:
Theorem 2.4 (Ash-Nerode [AN81, Theorem 2.2]). Let A be a computable structure
and R a relation on A. Suppose that for any tuple ¯c ∈A and any ﬁnitary existential
formula ϕ(¯c, ¯x), we can decide whether or not there is ¯a ∉R such that A ⊧ϕ(¯c, ¯a).
Then the following are equivalent:
(1) R is intrinsically c.e.
(2) R is deﬁned by a Σc
1 formula with ﬁnitely many parameters from A (we say
that R is formally Σ1 or formally c.e.).
In practice, most naturally occurring structures and relations satisfy the eﬀec-
tiveness condition from this theorem. However, there are structures which do not
have the eﬀectiveness condition, and some of these structures are counterexamples
to the conclusion of the theorem.
Barker [Bar88] later generalized this to a theorem about intrinsically Σα rela-
tions. Ash and Knight [AK96] also proved a result for intrinsically α-c.e. relations
(with the formal deﬁnition being of the form of Deﬁnition 2.2 above).
Ash, Knight, Manasse, and Slaman [AKMS89] and independently Chisholm
[Chi90] considered a relativized notion of intrinsic computability. We say that R
is relatively intrinsically Σα (or Πα, etc.) if, in every copy B of A, RB is Σ0
α(B)
(Π0
α(B), etc.). Then they were able to prove a theorem similar to Theorem 2.4
above but without an eﬀectiveness condition:
Theorem 2.5 (Ash-Knight-Manasse-Slaman [AKMS89], Chisholm [Chi90]). Let A
be a computable structure and R a relation on A. The following are equivalent:
(1) R is relatively intrinsically Σα,
(2) R is deﬁned by a Σc
α formula with ﬁnitely many parameters from A.
These theorems say that the computational complexity of a relation is strongly tied
to its logical complexity.
In order to give a ﬁner measure of the complexity of a relation, Harizanov [Har87]
introduced the degree spectrum.


CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARIES
10
Deﬁnition 2.6 (Degree Spectrum of a Relation). The degree spectrum of a relation
R on a computable structure A is the set
dgSp(R) = {d(RB) ∶B is a computable copy of A}.
2.3
Relativizing to a Cone
In this section, we will formally describe what we mean by working on a cone, and
by the degree spectrum of a relation on a cone.
Consider the degree spectrum
of a relation. For many natural structures and relations, the degree spectrum of
a relation is highly related to the model-theoretic properties of the relation R.
However, for more pathological structures (and ﬁrst-order arithmetic), the degree
spectra of relations can often be badly behaved. Some examples of such relations
were given in the introduction. On the other hand, Theorem 1.2 says that many
relations have degree spectra which are nicely behaved (of course, there are relations
which do not satisfy the eﬀectivity condition from this theorem and which do not
satisfy the conclusion—see [Har91]).
This is a common phenomenon in computable structure theory that there are
unnatural structures which are counterexamples to theorems which would otherwise
hold for natural structures. This unnatural behaviour tends to disappear when the
theorem is relativized to a suﬃciently high cone; in the case of Harizanov’s result,
relativizing the conclusion to any degree above 0′′ allows the theorem to be stated
without the eﬀectivity condition (since 0′′ can compute what is required by the
eﬀectivity condition).
A Turing cone is collection of sets of the form {X ∶X ≥T A} for some ﬁxed set
A. A collection of sets is Turing invariant if whenever X is in the collection, and
X ≡T Y , then Y is in the collection (i.e., the collection is a set of Turing degrees).
Martin [Mar68] noticed that any Turing invariant collection A which is determined1
either contains a cone, or contains a cone in its complement. Note that only one
of these can happen for a given set A, as any two cones intersect non-trivially and
contain a cone in their intersection. Moreover, by Borel determinacy (see [Mar75])
every Borel invariant set is determined. Thus we can form a {0,1}-valued measure
on the Borel sets of Turing degrees, selecting as “large” those sets of Turing degrees
which contain a cone.
Given a statement P which relativizes to any degree d, we say that P holds on
a cone if the set of degrees d for which the relativization of P to d holds contains a
cone. If P deﬁnes a Borel set of degrees in this way, then either P holds on a cone
or ¬P holds on a cone. If P holds on a cone, then P holds for most degrees, or for
suﬃciently high degrees.
We say that R is intrinsically Σα on a cone if for all degrees d on a cone, and all
copies B of A with B computable in d, RB is Σ0
α(d). Then by relativizing previous
1A set A (viewed as set of reals in Cantor space 2ω) is determined if one of the two players has
a winning strategy in the Gale-Stewart game GA, where players I and II alternate playing either
0 or 1; I wins if the combined sequence of plays is in A, and otherwise II wins. See [GS53] and
[Jec03].


CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARIES
11
results (Theorem 2.4 or Theorem 2.5), we see that R is intrinsically Σα on a cone
if and only if it is deﬁned by a Σin
α formula, without any computability-theoretic
assumptions on either A and R or the Σin
α formula. This is a relativisation to a
cone of both intrinsically Σ0
α and relatively intrinsically Σ0
α simultaneously.
Note that when we work on a cone, we do not need to assume that the structure
A or the relation R are computable, because we can consider only cones with bases
above A ⊕R.
Now we will deﬁne what we mean by the degree spectrum of a relation on a
cone. First, there is a natural relativisation of the degree spectrum of a relation to
a degree d. The degree spectrum of R below the degree d is
dgSp(A,R)≤d = {d(RB)⊕d ∶(B,RB) is an isomorphic copy of (A,R) with B ≤T d}.
An alternate deﬁnition would require the isomorphic copy B to be Turing equivalent
to d, rather than just computable in d:
dgSp(A,R)≡d = {d(RB)⊕d ∶(B,RB) is an isomorphic copy of (A,R) with B ≡T d}.
If B ≤T d, then by Knight’s theorem on the upwards closure of the degree spectrum
of structures (see [Kni86]), there is an isomorphic copy C of B with C ≡T d and
a d-computable isomorphism f ∶B →C. Then RC ⊕d ≡T RB ⊕d. So these two
deﬁnitions are equivalent.
The proof of Theorem 1.2 relativizes to show that for any degree d ≥0′′, if
dgSp(A,R)≤d contains a degree which is not computable in d, then it contains
every degree CEA in d.
One could also have deﬁned the degree spectrum of a
relation to be the set
dgSp∗(A,R)≤d = {d(RB) ∶(B,RB) is an isomorphic copy of (A,R) with B ≤T d}.
In this case, Harizanov’s proof of Theorem 1.2 does not relativize. In Appendix
A, we will consider a new proof of Harizanov’s result which relativizes in the cor-
rect way for this deﬁnition of the degree spectrum. However, our proof becomes
much more complicated than Harizanov’s original proof. For the other results in
the paper, we will not consider dgSp∗(A,R)≤d. Though it is quite possible that
there are similar ways to extend our proofs, it would distract from main content
of those results. We are interested in whether there is any real diﬀerence between
dgSp(A,R)≤d and dgSp∗(A,R)≤d, or whether any result provable about one trans-
fers in a natural manner to the other. For example, is it always the case that re-
stricting dgSp∗(A,R)≤d to the degrees above d gives dgSp(A,R)≤d for suﬃciently
high d?
Now we want to make our relativisation of the degree spectrum independent of
the degree d. Thus we turn to Deﬁnition 1.1 due to Montalb´an, which we will now
develop more thoroughly. To each structure A and relation R, we can assign the
map fR∶d ↦dgSp(A,R)≤d. Given two pairs (A,R) and (B,S), for any degree d,
either dgSp(A,R)≤d is equal to dgSp(B,S)≤d, one is strictly contained in the other,
or they are incomparable. By Borel determinacy, there is a cone on which exactly
one of these happens. Thus we get a pre-order on these functions fR, and taking


CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARIES
12
the quotient by equivalence, we get a partial order on degree spectrum. Denote
the elements of the quotient by dgSprel(A,R). We call dgSprel(A,R) the degree
spectrum of R on a cone.
For many classes Γ of degrees which relativize, for example the Σα degrees, there
is a natural way of viewing them in this partial ordering by considering the map
Γ ∶d →Γ(d). By an abuse of notation, we will talk about such a class Γ as a degree
spectrum (in fact, it is easy to see for many simple classes of degrees that they are
in fact the degree spectrum of some relation on some structure). Thus we can say,
for example, that the degree spectrum, on a cone, of some relation contains the Σ0
α
degrees, or is equal to the d.c.e. degrees, and so on.
In particular, using this notation, we see that Theorem 1.2 yields:
Corollary 2.7 (Harizanov). Let A be a structure and R a relation on A. Then
either:
(1) dgSprel(A,R) = ∆0
1 or
(2) dgSprel(A,R) ⊇Σ0
1.
The cone on which this theorem holds is (A⊕R)′′—i.e., one could replace dgSprel
with dgSp≤d for any degree d ≥T (A ⊕R)′′.
We also get the following restatements of Theorems 1.5 and 1.6:
Corollary 2.8. Let A be a structure and R a relation on A. Then either:
(1) dgSprel(A,R) ⊆∆0
2 or
(2) dgSprel(A,R) ⊇2-CEA.
Corollary 2.9. There is a structure A and relations R and S on A such that
dgSprel(A,R) and dgSprel(A,S) contains the c.e. degrees and are contained within
the d.c.e. degrees, but neither dgSprel(A,R) ⊆dgSprel(A,S) nor dgSprel(A,S) ⊆
dgSprel(A,R).
Note that these two concepts that we have just introduced—intrinsic com-
putability on a cone and degree spectra on a cone—are completely independent
of the presentations of A and R. Moreover, the intrinsic computability of a relation
R is completely dependent on its model-theoretic properties. So by looking on a
cone, we are able to look at more model-theoretic properties of relations while using
tools of computability theory.
The reader should always keep in mind the motivation behind this work. The
theorems we prove are intended to be applied to naturally occurring structures.
For well-behaved structures, “property P” and “property P on a cone” should be
viewed as interchangeable.
This work was originally motivated by a question of Montalb´an ﬁrst stated in
[Wri13]. There is no known case of a structure (A,R) where dgSp(A,R)≤d does
not have a maximum degree for d suﬃciently large. When the degree spectrum
does contain a maximum degree, deﬁne the function fA,R which maps a degree d to


CHAPTER 2. PRELIMINARIES
13
the maximum element of dgSp(A,R)≤d. This is a degree-invariant function2, and
hence the subject of Martin’s conjecture. Montalb´an has asked whether Martin’s
conjecture is true of this function fA,R, that is, is it true that for every structure A
and relation R, there is an ordinal α < ω1 such that for all d on a cone, d(α) is the
maximal element of dgSp(A,R)≤d?
Recall the question of Ash and Knight from the introduction, which we stated
as: is it true that every degree spectrum is either contained in the the ∆α degrees
or contains all of the α-CEA degrees? If this was true, then Montalb´an’s question
would (almost) be answered positively, as every relation R has a deﬁnition which is
Σin
α and Πin
α for some α < ω1; choosing α to be minimal, if α is a successor ordinal
α = β+1, then for all degrees d on a cone, there is a complete ∆0
α(d) degree which is
β-CEA above d and hence is the maximal element of dgSp(A,R)≤d. The relativized
version of Harizanov’s Theorem 1.2 answers Ash and Knight’s question (and hence
Montalb´an’s question) for relations which are deﬁned by a Σin
1
formula, and our
Theorem 1.5 answers these questions for relations which are Σin
2 -deﬁnable3.
2Technically, the function we are considering maps a set C to some set D which is of maximum
degree in dgSp(A, R)≤d(C). For now, we can ignore which sets we choose.
3Note that the proofs of these results also show that fA,R is uniformly degree-invariant for
these relations, which also implies that Martins conjecture holds for these fA,R—see [Ste82] and
[SS88]. What we mean is that, given sets C and D of degree d (with C ≡T D), Theorem 1.2
(respectively Theorem 1.5) provide C, D isomorphic copies of A with C ≤T C and D ≤T D with
RC ≡T C′ and RD ≡T D′ (resp. RC ≡T C′′ and RD ≡T D′′) and these Turing equivalences are
uniform in C′ and D′ (resp. C′′ and D′′). So given an index for the equivalence C ≡T D, we can
eﬀectively ﬁnd an index for the equivalence RC ≡T RD.


Chapter 3
Degree Spectra Between the
C.E. Degrees and the D.C.E.
Degrees
We know that every degree spectrum (on a cone) which contains a non-computable
degree contains all of the c.e. degrees. In this section, we will consider relations
whose degree spectra strictly contain the c.e. degrees.
The motivating question
is whether any degree spectrum on a cone which strictly contains the c.e. degrees
contains all of the d.c.e. degrees. We will show that this is false by proving Theorem
1.6 which says that there are two incomparable degree spectra which contain only
d.c.e. degrees. In the process, we will deﬁne what it means to be intrinsically of c.e.
degree (as opposed to simply being c.e.) and give a characterization of the relatively
intrinsically d.c.e. relations which are intrinsically of c.e. degree, and at the same
time a suﬃcient (but not necessary) condition for a relation to not be intrinsically
of c.e. degree.
3.1
Necessary and Suﬃcient Conditions to be In-
trinsically of C.E. Degree
We begin by deﬁning what it means to be intrinsically of c.e. degree.
Deﬁnition 3.1. R on A is intrinsically of c.e. degree if in every computable copy
B of A, RB is of c.e. degree.
We can make similar deﬁnitions for relatively intrinsically of c.e. degree and intrin-
sically of c.e. degree on a cone. As far as we are aware, these are new deﬁnitions.
Any relation which is intrinsically c.e. is intrinsically of c.e. degree, but the
following example shows that the converse implication does not hold (even on a
cone).
14


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
15
Example 3.2. Let A be two-sorted with sorts B and C. There is a relation S in
the signature of A of type B × C. The sort B is a directed graph, each connected
component of which consists of two elements and one directed edge. Each element
of B is related via S to zero, one, or two elements of C, and the additional relation
R (not in the signature of A) consists of those elements of B which are related to
exactly one element of C. A consists of inﬁnitely many copies of each of these three
connected components and nothing else, with the edge adjacency relation and S:
0
/ 1
1
/ 2
2
/ 2
The numbers show how many elements of C a particular element of B is related to.
For example, 0 →1 is a two element connected component with a single directed
edge, and the ﬁrst element is not related to any elements of C, while the second
element is related to a single element of C. In any copy B of A, the set T B of
elements related to exactly two elements of C is c.e. in B. We claim that this set
has the same Turing degree as RB. Let a and b be elements in A, with a directed
edge from a to b. Then there are three possibilities:
(1) a ∉RB, b ∈RB and a ∉T B, b ∉T B,
(2) a ∈RB, b ∉RB and a ∉T B, b ∈T B, or
(3) a ∉RB, b ∉RB and a ∈T B, b ∈T B.
Each of these three possibilities is distinct from the others both in terms of R and
also in terms of T B. So knowing whether a ∈RB and b ∈RB determines whether
a ∈T B and b ∈T B, and vice versa. Hence RB ⊕B ≡T B ⊕B. Since T B is c.e., RB is
of c.e. degree in D(B). Note that RB is always d.c.e. in D(B), but one can show
using a standard argument that RB is not always c.e. in D(B).
We will begin by ﬁnding a necessary and suﬃcient condition for a relation to be
intrinsically of c.e. degree. We will assume, for one of the directions, that the relation
is relatively intrinsically d.c.e. A relation which is not intrinsically ∆2 cannot be
intrinsically of c.e. degree (and, assuming suﬃcient eﬀectiveness conditions, the
same is true for the relative notions).
We leave the question open for relations
which are relatively intrinsically ∆2 but not relatively intrinsically d.c.e.
An important idea in most of the results in this work are the free tuples from
the theorem of Ash and Nerode on intrinsically computable relations [AN81], and
other variations.
Deﬁnition 3.3. Let ¯c be a tuple from A. We say that ¯a ∉R is free (or 1-free) over
¯c if for any ﬁnitary existential formula ψ(¯c, ¯x) true of ¯a in A, there is ¯a′ ∈R which
also satisﬁes ψ(¯c, ¯x).
Such free elements, and many variations, have been used throughout the literature,
including in many of the results we referenced in the previous chapters. We will
only use 1-free elements in Appendix A, but we will use other variants in Chapters
3, 4, and 5.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
16
In the spirit of the deﬁnitions made just before Propositions 2.2 and 2.3 of
[AK96], we will make the following deﬁnition of what it means to be diﬀerence-free,
or d-free. Let A be a computable structure and R a computable relation on A.
We begin with the case where R is unary, where the condition is simpler to state.
We say that a ∉R is d-free over ¯c if for every b1,... ,bn and existential formula
ϕ(¯c,u,v1,... ,vn) true of a,b1,... ,bn, there are a′ ∈R and b′
1,... ,b′
n which satisfy
ϕ(¯c,u,v1,... ,vn) such that for every existential formula ψ(¯c,u,v1,... ,vn) true of
them, there are a′′,b′′
1,... ,b′′
n satisfying ψ with a′′ ∉R and bi ∈R ⇔b′′
i ∈R.
Note that this is diﬀerent from the 2-free elements which are deﬁned just before
Propositions 2.2 and 2.3 in [AK96]. The deﬁnitions are the same, except that for a
to be 2-free over ¯c, there is no requirement on the bi and b′′
i . Note that an element
a may be 2-free over ¯c, but not d-free over ¯c (but if a is d-free over ¯c, then it is
2-free over ¯c).
Now suppose that R is an m-ary relation. We say that ¯a is d-free over ¯c if for
every ¯b and existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) true of ¯a,¯b, there are ¯a′ and ¯b′ which satisfy
ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) such that R restricted to tuples from ¯c¯a′ is not the same as R restricted
to tuples from ¯c¯a and also such that for every existential formula ψ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) true of
them, there are ¯a′′,¯b′′ satisfying ψ and such that R restricted to ¯c¯a′′¯b′′ is the same
as R restricted to ¯c¯a¯b. If R is unary, a tuple ¯a is d-free over ¯c if and only if one of
its entries ai is.
Under suﬃcient eﬀectiveness conditions we will show—for a formally d.c.e. rela-
tion R on a structure A—that R is not intrinsically of c.e. degree if and only if for
each tuple ¯c there is some ¯a which is d-free over ¯c (note that under the eﬀectiveness
conditions of Proposition 2.2 of Ash and Knight [AK96], a relation is formally d.c.e.
if and only if it is intrinsically d.c.e.). In fact, the existence of a tuple ¯c over which
no tuple ¯a is d-free will imply that R is not intrinsically of c.e. degree even if R is
not formally d.c.e. We will use this in Theorem 4.19 of Chapter 4.
When stated in terms of degree spectra on a cone, our result is:
Proposition 3.4. Let A be a structure and R a relation on A. Then if, for each
tuple ¯c, there is ¯a which is d-free over ¯c, then the degree spectrum dgSprel(A,R) on
a cone strictly contains the c.e. degrees. Moreover, if R is formally d.c.e., then this
is a necessary condition.
The (relativizations of) the next two propositions prove the two directions of
this using the appropriate eﬀectiveness conditions.
Proposition 3.5. Let R be a formally d.c.e. relation on a computable structure A.
Suppose that there is a tuple ¯c over which no ¯a is d-free. Assume that given tuples
¯a and ¯c, we can ﬁnd witnesses ¯b and ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) to the fact that ¯a is not d-free over
¯c (and furthermore, given ¯a′ and ¯b′ satisfying ϕ, ﬁnd ψ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v)) as in the deﬁnition
of d-freeness. Then for every computable copy B of A, RB is of c.e. degree.
Proof. Let A and R be as in the statement of the proposition. We will assume that
R is unary. The proof when R is not unary uses exactly the same ideas, but is a
little more complicated as we cannot ask whether individual elements are or are not
in RB, but instead we must ask about tuples (including tuples which may include


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
17
elements of ¯c). The translation of the proof to the case when R is not unary requires
no new ideas, and considering only unary relations will make the proof much easier
to understand.
Let ¯c ∈A be such that no a ∉R is d-free over ¯c. We may omit any reference to ¯c
by assuming that it is in our language. Let B be a computable copy of A. We must
show that RB is of c.e. degree. We will use a, a′, ¯b, ¯b′, etc. for elements of A, and
d, e, etc. for elements of B.
We will begin by making some deﬁnitions, following which we will explain the
intuitive idea behind the proof. Finally, we will deﬁne two c.e. sets A and B such
that RB = A −B ≡T A ⊕B.
Since there are no d-free elements, for each a ∉R there is an existential formula
ϕa(u,v1,... ,vna) and a tuple ¯ba = ba
1,... ,ba
na such that
A ⊧ϕa(a,¯ba)
which witness the fact that a is not d-free.
Now let a ∉R, a′ ∈R, and ¯b′ be such that
A ⊧ϕa(a′,¯b′).
By choice of ϕa and ¯ba, there is an existential formula ψ(u, ¯v) extending ϕa(u, ¯v)
such that for all a′′ and tuples ¯b′′ = (b′′
1,... ,b′′
na) with
A ⊧ψ(a′′,¯b′′),
if bk ∈R ⇔b′′
k ∈R for all k then ¯a′′ ∈R. Note that ψ depends only on a, a′, and ¯b′
(as ¯b depends on a). Let ψa,a′,¯b′ be this formula ψ. We can ﬁnd ¯ba, ϕa, and ψa,a′,¯b
eﬀectively using the hypothesis of the theorem.
Let R be deﬁned by α(u) ∧¬β(u) with α(u) and β(u) being Σc
1 formulas with
ﬁnitely many parameters (which we may assume are included in our language). We
may assume that every solution of ψa,a′,¯b′ for every a, a′, and ¯b′ is a solution of α(u)
by replacing each formula by its conjunction with α(u). Let αs(u) and βs(u) be the
ﬁnitary existential formulas which are the disjunctions of the disjuncts enumerated
in α(u) and β(u) respectively by stage s.
We can eﬀectively enumerate the Σc
1 formulas which are true of elements of B.
At each stage s, we have a list of formulas which we have found to be true so far.
This is the partial existential diagram of B at stage s, which we denote by D∃,s(B).
We say that an element d ∈B appears to be in RB at stage s if one of the disjuncts
of αs(d) is in D∃,s(B), and no disjunct of βs(d) is in D∃,s(B). Otherwise, we say
that d appears to be in ¬RB at stage s.
Now note that α deﬁnes a c.e. set ˜A in B, and β deﬁnes a c.e. set ˜B, and
RB = ˜A −˜B. Then ˜A ⊕˜B ≥T RB. If in fact we had ˜A ⊕˜B ≡T RB, then RB would
be of c.e. degree. However, RB may not compute ˜A ⊕˜B because it may not be
able to tell the diﬀerence between an element of ˜B and an element not in ˜A. So we
will come up with appropriate sets A and B where RB can tell the diﬀerence, i.e.
RB ≥T A and RB ≥T B. We can always assume that B ⊆A and hence B = A −RB,
so it suﬃces to show that RB ≥T A.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
18
The set A will consist of the of elements d ∈B with the following property: for
some stages t > s,
(1) d appears to be in RB at stage s and at stage t, and
(2) for every a ∈A with a ∉R and ¯e = (e1,... ,ena) ∈B we have found at stage
s with the property that ϕa(d, ¯e) is in D∃,s(B), by stage t we have found an
a′ ∈A and ¯b′ ∈A with ψa,a′,¯b′(d, ¯e) in D∃,t(B).
When we say that at stage s we have found a ∈A and ¯e ∈B, we mean that a comes
from the ﬁrst s elements of A and ¯e from the ﬁrst s elements of B.
Claim 3.6. RB ⊆A and thus RB = A −(A −RB).
Proof. Let d be an element of RB. There is some stage s at which d appears to be
in RB and moreover, at any stage t > s, d still appears to be in RB. For any a ∈A
and ¯e ∈B with
B ⊧ϕa(d, ¯e),
there are a′ ∈A and ¯b′ ∈A with
B ⊧ψa,a′,¯b′(d, ¯e).
If f ∶A →B is an isomorphism, then a′ = f −1(d) and ¯b′ = f −1(¯e) are one possible
choice. This suﬃces to show that d ∈A, and so RB ⊆A.
The second part of the claim follows immediately.
Claim 3.7. A and A −RB are c.e.
Proof. A is c.e. because to check whether d ∈A, we search for s and t satisfying the
two conditions in the deﬁnition of A. For a given s and t, these two conditions are
computable to check.
A −RB is c.e. because it is just equal to the elements of A which satisfy the
formula β, as every element of A satisﬁes α.
Claim 3.8. RB ≥T A.
Proof. Given d, we want to check (using RB as an oracle) whether d ∈A. First ask
RB whether d ∈RB. If the answer is yes, then we must have d ∈A.
Otherwise, d ∉RB. Now, since A is c.e., it suﬃces to show that checking whether
d is in its complement is also c.e. Suppose that at some stage s, d has not yet been
enumerated into A, and we ﬁnd a ∈A and ¯e ∈B such that:
(1) d does not appear to be in RB at stage s,
(2) a and ¯e are from among the ﬁrst s elements of A and B respectively,
(3) ϕa(d, ¯e) is in D∃,s(B), and
(4) the oracle RB tells us that ej ∈RB if and only if ba
j ∈R.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
19
We claim that d ∉A. Suppose to the contrary that d ∈A. Then there is a stage
s′ at which d appears to be in RB, and a stage t′ at which d enters A (i.e., s′ and
t′ are the s and t from the deﬁnition of A). Now at these two stages s′ and t′, d
appears to be in RB. Moreover, we know that at stage s, d has not yet entered A,
and so s < t′. Then we must have s < s′ since between stages s′ and t′, d appears to
be in RB, and this is not the case at stage s. Then there must be elements a′,¯b′ ∈A
with ψa,a′,¯b′(d, ¯e) in D∃,t′(B). This is a contradiction, since by choice of ψa,a′¯b′ we
cannot have d ∉RB and ej ∈RB ⇔bj ∈R.
Now, since d ∉RB, there exists some a and ¯e such that
B ⊧ϕa(d, ¯e)
and ej ∈RB if and only if ba
j ∈R. If f ∶A →B is an isomorphism, a = f −1(d) and
¯e = f(¯ba) are one possible choice for a and ¯e. Then one of two things must happen
ﬁrst—either d is enumerated into A, or we ﬁnd a and ¯e as above at some stage s
when a does not appear to be in RB and hence d is not in A. Since ﬁnding such a
and ¯e is a computable search, the complement of A is c.e. in RB.
Now since RB ≥T A, RB ≥T A −RB. Thus RB ≥T A ⊕(A −RB). It is trivial to
see that A ⊕(A −RB) ≥RB. Finally, A and A −RB are c.e. sets, and so their join
is of c.e. degree. Thus RB is of c.e. degree.
For the second direction, we do not have to assume that R is formally d.c.e. We
will use this direction in Section 4.2 and in Chapter 5, and the style of the proof
will be a model for Propositions 3.15 and 3.17, and Theorem 4.19 later on.
Proposition 3.9. Let A be a computable structure and R a computable relation on
A. Suppose that for each ¯c, there is ¯a ∉R d-free over ¯c. Also, suppose that for each
tuple ¯c, we can eﬀectively ﬁnd a tuple ¯a which is d-free over ¯c, and moreover we
can ﬁnd ¯a′, ¯b′, and ¯a′′ as in the deﬁnition of d-freeness. Then there is a computable
copy B of A such that RB is not of c.e. degree.
Proof. We will assume that R is a unary relation, and hence that for each ¯c, there
is a ∉R d-free over ¯c. We begin by describing a few conventions. We denote by
X[0,... ,n] the ﬁrst n + 1 elements of X. We say that a computation ΦX = Y has
use u if it takes fewer than u steps and it only uses the oracle X[0,...,u].
The proof will be to construct a computable copy B of A which diagonalizes
against every possible Turing equivalence with a c.e. set. The construction will be
a ﬁnite-injury priority construction. We use the d-free elements to essentially run
a standard proof that there are d.c.e. degrees which are not c.e. degrees.
We will construct B with domain ω by giving at each stage s a tentative ﬁnite
isomorphism Fs ∶ω →A. In the limit, we get F ∶ω →A a bijection, and B is the
pullback along F of the structure on A. We will maintain values ne,i,j[s], ue,i,j[s],
te,i,j[s], and ve,i,j[s] which reference computations that have converged. See Figure
3.1 for a visual representation of what these values mean.
We will meet the following requirements:


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
20
Re,i,j If Φi and Φj are total, then either RB ≠ΦWe
i
or We ≠ΦRB
j
.
Si The ith element of A is in the image of F.
Put a priority ordering on these requirements.
At each stage, each requirement Re,i,j will be in one of four states: initial-
ized, waiting-for-computation, waiting-for-change, or diagonalized. A
requirement will move through these four stages in order, and be satisﬁed when it
enters the state diagonalized. If it is injured, a requirement will return to the
state initialized.
We are now ready to describe the construction.
Construction.
At stage 0, let Fs = ∅and for each e,i,j, let ne,i,j[0], ue,i,j[0], te,i,j[0], and
ve,i,j[0] be 0 (i.e., undeﬁned).
At a stage s + 1, let Fs ∶{0,...,ξs} →A be the partial isomorphism determined
in the previous stage, and let Bs be the ﬁnite part of the diagram of B which has
been determined so far. We have an approximation RBs to RB which we get by
taking k ∈RBs if Fs(k) ∈R.
We will deal with a single requirement—the highest priority requirement which
requires attention at stage s + 1. We say that a requirement Si requires attention
at stage s + 1 if the ith element of A is not in the image of Fs. If Si is the highest
priority requirement which requires attention, then let a be the ith element of A.
Let Fs+1 extend Fs with Fs+1(ξs + 1) = a. Set ξs+1 = ξs + 1. Injure each requirement
of higher priority.
The conditions for a requirement Re,i,j to require attention at stage s+1 depends
on the state of the requirement. Below, we will list for each possible state of Re,i,j,
the conditions for Re,i,j to require attention, and the action that the requirement
takes if it is the highest priority requirement that requires attention.
Initialized The requirement has been initialized, so ne,i,j[0], ue,i,j[0], te,i,j[0],
and ve,i,j[0] are all 0.
Requires attention The requirement always requires attention.
Action Choose a new element a of A which is d-free over the image of Fs. Note
that a ∉R. Set Fs+1(ξs + 1) = a, ne,i,j[s + 1] = ξs, and ξs+1 = ξs + 1.
Waiting-for-computation We have set ne,i,j, so we need to wait for the compu-
tations (3.1) and (3.2) below to converge. Once they do, we can use the fact
that F(ne,i,j) = a ∉R was chosen to be d-free to modify F so that F(ne,i,j) ∈R
to break the computation (3.1).
Requires attention The requirement requires attention if there is a computation
RBs[0,... ,ne,i,j[s]] = ΦWe,s
i,s
[0,... ,ne,i,j[s]]
(3.1)


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
21
with use u, and a computation
We,s[0,... ,u] = ΦRBs
j,s [0,... ,u]
(3.2)
with use v.
Action Set ue,i,j[s + 1] = u, te,i,j[s + 1] = s, and ve,i,j[s + 1] = v. Let
¯c = (Fs(0),...,Fs(ne,i,j[s] −1))
a = Fs(ne,i,j[s])
¯b = (Fs(ne,i,j[s] + 1),... ,Fs(ξs)).
Write ¯c = (c0,... ,cne,i,j[s]−1) and ¯b = (bne,i,j[s]+1,... ,bξs). We will have en-
sured during the construction that a is d-free over ¯c. So we can ﬁnd a′ ∈R
and ¯b′ such that ¯c,a′, ¯b′ satisﬁes the same quantiﬁer-free formulas determined
so far in Bs as ¯c,a,¯b, and so that for any further existential formula ψ(¯c,u, ¯v)
true of ¯c,a′,¯b′, there are a′′ ∉R and ¯b′′(b′′
ne,i,j[s]+1,... ,b′′
ξs) satisfying ψ and
with b′′
k ∈R if and only if bk ∈R. Deﬁne
Fs+1(k) = ck
for 0 ≤k < ne,i,j[s]
Fs+1(ne,i,j[s]) = a′
Fs+1(k) = b′
k
for ne,i,j[s] < k ≤ξs.
Set the state of this requirement to waiting-for-change. Each requirement
of lower priority has been injured. Reset the state of all such requirements to
initialized and set all of the corresponding values to 0.
Waiting-for-change In the previous state, F was modiﬁed to break the compu-
tation (3.1). If we are to have RB = ΦWe
i
, then We must change below the use
of that computation. In this state, we wait for this to happen, and then use
the fact that a was chosen to be d-free in state initialized to return RB to
the way it was for the computation (3.2).
Requires attention Let u = ue,i,j[s], v = ve,i,j[s] and t = te,i,j[s]. The requirement
requires attention if
We,s[0,... ,u] ≠We,t[0,... ,u].
Action Let
¯c = (Fs(0),... ,Fs(ne,i,j[s] −1))
a′ = Fs(ne,i,j[s])
¯b′ = (Fs(ne,i,j[s] + 1),... ,Fs(v))
¯d′ = (Fs(v + 1),... ,Fs(ξs))


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
22
As before, write ¯c = (c0,... ,cne,i,j[s]−1), ¯b′ = (b′
ne,i,j[s]+1,... ,b′
v), and ¯d′ =
(d′
v+1,... ,d′
ξs). Now a′ was chosen in state waiting-for-computation. So
we can choose a′′ ∉R, ¯b′′ = (b′′
ne,i,j[s]+1,... ,b′′
v), and ¯d′′ = (d′′
v+1,... ,d′′
ξs) such
that ¯ca′′¯b′′ ¯d′′ satisﬁes any formula determined by Bs to be satisﬁed by ¯ca′¯b′ ¯d′,
and moreover b′′
k ∈R if and only if Ft(k) ∈R (note that Ft(k) is the value bk
from state waiting-for-computation). Deﬁne
Fs+1(k) = ck
for 0 ≤k < ne,i,j[s]
Fs+1(ne,i,j[s]) = a′′
Fs+1(k) = b′′
k
for ne,i,j[s] < k ≤v
Fs+1(k) = d′′
k
for v < k ≤ξs.
Then we will have
RBs+1[0,... ,v] = RBt[0,... ,v].
So
ΦRB
s+1
j
[0,... ,u] = ΦRB
t
j
[0,... ,u] = We,t[0,... ,u] ≠We,s+1[0,... ,u]
since the use of this computation at stage t was v.
Set the state of this
requirement to diagonalized. Each requirement of lower priority has been
injured. Reset the state of all such requirements to initialized and set all of
the corresponding values to ∅.
Diagonalized In this state, RB is the same as it was under the use v in the
computation (3.2) from state waiting-for-computation. By (3.2), if we
are to have We = ΦRB
j
, then We restricted to the elements 0,...,u must be
the same as it was then. But this cannot happen, because some such element
entered We during the previous state. So we have satisﬁed the requirement
Re,i,j.
Requires attention The requirement never requires attention.
Action None.
Set Bs+1 to be the atomic and negated atomic formulas true of 0,... ,ξs+1 with
G¨odel number at most s.
End construction.
Note that at any stage s, the ne,i,j are ordered by the priority of the correspond-
ing requirements. This is because if a requirement is injured, each lower priority
requirement is injured at the same time, and then new values of ne,i,j are deﬁned
in order of priority. Moreover, if Re,i,j is of higher priority than Re′,i′,j′ and ve,i,j
is deﬁned, then ne,i,j < ve,i,j < ne′,i′,j′.
If Re,i,j is never injured after some stage s, then it only acts at most three
times—once in each of the stages initialized, waiting-for-computation, and


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
23
waiting-for-change, in that order—and it never moves backwards through the
stages. A requirement Si acts only once if it is not injured. So every requirement
is injured only ﬁnitely many times.
It remains to show that every requirement is eventually satisﬁed. Suppose to
the contrary that some requirement is not satisﬁed. There must be some least such
requirement. First, suppose that it is a requirement Si. Then there is a stage s
after which each lower requirement never acts. Then at the next stage, Si acts, and
is never again injured. So Si is satisﬁed.
Now suppose that Re,i,j is the least requirement which is not satisﬁed, and let s
be a stage after which each lower requirement never acts. So Re,i,j is never injured
after the stage s. Also, since Re,i,j is not satisﬁed, we have
We = ΦRB
j
and RB = ΦWe
i
.
If Re,i,j was in state initialized at stage s, then at a later stage, ne,i,j is
deﬁned and the requirement enters stage waiting-for-computation. Eventually,
at a stage t, the following computations must converge:
RBt[0,... ,ne,i,j] = ΦWe,t
i,t
[0,... ,ne,i,j]
with use u
(3.3)
We,t[0,... ,u] = ΦRBt
j,t [0,... ,u]
with use v.
(3.4)
Then Re,i,j requires attention at stage t + 1. We modify F to have F(ne,i,j) ∈R,
breaking computation (3.3). Requirement Re,i,j also moves to state waiting-for-
change.
Since RB = ΦWe
i
, eventually at some stage t′, We must change below the use u
of the computation (3.3). Then Re,i,j requires attention at stage t′ + 1. We modify
F by moving F(ne,i,j) back to ¬R and ensuring that
RBt′+1[0,... ,v] = RBt[0,... ,v].
But for every stage t′′ > t′ we have We,t′′[0,... ,u] ≠We,t[0,... ,u] since We is a c.e.
set and
We,t′[0,... ,u] ≠We,t[0,... ,u].
This, together with computation (3.4) contradicts the assumption that RB = ΦWe
i
.
So every requirement is satisﬁed.
In Proposition 3.5, we showed that a condition about the non-existence of free
elements is equivalent to a condition on the possible degrees of the relation RB
in computable copies B of A.
In particular, we showed that the relation RB is
Turing equivalent to the join of c.e. sets. In, for example, the theorems of Ash and
Nerode [AN81] and Barker [Bar88] there are two parts: ﬁrst, that a condition on the
existence of free tuples is equivalent to a condition on the possible computability-
theoretic properties of RB; and second, that a condition on the existence of free
tuples is equivalent to a syntactic condition on the relation R. In Propositions 3.5
and 3.9, we are missing this second syntactic part.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
24
We might hope that there is a syntactic condition which is equivalent (under
some eﬀectiveness conditions) to being intrinsically of c.e. degree. For example, one
candidate (and certainly a suﬃcient condition) would be that there are formally Σ0
1
sets A ⊇R and B = A −R such that A is formally Σ0
1 and Π0
1 relative to R.
In the proof of Proposition 3.5, we found c.e. sets A and B in our particular
copy B of A such that RB = A−B and RB ≥T A. These c.e. sets were not necessarily
deﬁnable by Σ0
1 formulas, but instead depended on the enumeration of B. When
R was deﬁned by α(x) ∧¬β(x), whether or not an element a ∉RB which satisﬁed
both α(x) and β(x) was in A depended on the order in which we discovered certain
facts in B.
The following example should be taken as (very strong) evidence that we cannot
ﬁnd an appropriate syntactic condition.
Example 3.10. Consider a structure as in Example 3.2, except that the connected
components are diﬀerent. There are inﬁnitely many copies of each of the following
ﬁve connected components:
0
0
1
0
1
0
@✁✁✁✁✁
/
❂❂❂❂❂
✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳
1
1
@✁✁✁✁✁
/
❂❂❂❂❂
✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳
1
/ 0
2
@✁✁✁✁✁
/
❂❂❂❂❂
✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳
1
/ 0
2
@✁✁✁✁✁
/
❂❂❂❂❂
✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳
1
2
@✁✁✁✁✁
/
❂❂❂❂❂
✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳✳
1
1
1
1
1
1
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
The formally d.c.e. relation R consists of the nodes which are labeled 1. Note that
the elements at the center of their connected component are deﬁnable in both a Σ0
1
and a Π0
1 way (in a Σ0
1 way as they are the only nodes of degree at least three, and
in a Π0
1 way because they are the unique such nodes in their connected components,
and so they are the only node which are not connected to some other node of degree
at least three). In particular, given a connected component, we can compute the
center.
Claim 3.11. R is relatively intrinsically of c.e. degree.
Proof. We will use Proposition 3.5.1 First, we claim that no tuple ¯a is d-free over
∅. Since R is unary, it suﬃces to show that no single element a is d-free over ∅. If a
is not in the center of its connected component, then there is an existential formula
ϕ(u) which witnesses this. If a′ ∈R also satisﬁes ϕ(u), then ϕ(u) ∧ψ(u) is true
of a′ where ψ(u) is the existential formula which says that u is labeled “1” or “2”.
Every solution of ϕ(u) ∧ψ(u) is in R. So a is not d-free over ∅. Now suppose that
a ∉R is the center element of its connected component. If a is labeled “2”, then it
is not d-free over ∅. So suppose that a is labeled “0”. There is a b ∉R which is
connected to a, and an existential formula ϕ(u,v) which says that u is the center
1This will also give us our ﬁrst non-trivial application of Proposition 3.5.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
25
element of its connected component and v is connected to u. Now if a′ ∈R satisﬁes
(∃v)ϕ(u,v), then a′ also satisﬁes ψ(u) which says that there is a chain of length
two leading oﬀof a′. Now suppose that a′′ ∉R satisﬁes ψ(u) ∧(∃v)ϕ(u,v). Let
b′′ be such that we have ψ(a′′,b′′). Now, since a′′ satisﬁes ψ(u), any such b′′ must
be labeled “1” and hence be in R. But we had b ∉R. Thus a cannot have been
d-free. So there is no tuple ¯a which is d-free over ∅. The eﬀectiveness conditions
of Proposition 3.5 are immediate, because everything we did above is computable.
Moreover, this relativizes. Thus R is relatively intrinsically of c.e. degree.
Now we argue that there is no syntactical fact about R which explains this.
Such a syntactical fact should say that R is intercomputable with a join of formally
Σ1 sets. So it should say something like: there is a join S of formally Σ1 sets which
is formally Π1(R), and R is formally Σ1(S) and Π1(S). We will show that there
are no non-trivial sets which are formally Σ0
1 and Π0
1(R).
Let A, B, C, D, and E be the sets of points which are at the center of connected
components of the ﬁrst, second, third, fourth and ﬁfth types respectively. It is not
hard to check that the formally Σ0
1 sets are:
(1) A ∪B ∪C ∪D ∪E,
(2) B ∪C ∪D ∪E,
(3) B ∪C,
(4) C ∪D ∪E, and
(5) C.
The formally Σ0
1(R) sets are those above, and in addition:
(1) B,
(2) A ∪D,
(3) A ∪B ∪D,
(4) A ∪C ∪D ∪E.
Every Σ1(R) set containing E also contains C and D. If a set X and its complement
¯X are both Σ1(R) and one of them is Σ1, then one of them must contain E,
and hence C and D. Then the other must be contained within A ∪B. The only
possibilities for X and ¯X are B and A∪C ∪D ∪E, but neither of these are formally
Σ1.
So there are no formally Σ1 sets which are also formally Π1(R). Thus it seems
impossible to have a syntactic condition which is necessary and suﬃcient for a
relation to be intrinsically of c.e. degree.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
26
3.2
Incomparable Degree Spectra of D.C.E. De-
grees
In this section our goal is to prove the following theorem, which will yield Theorem
1.6:
Theorem 3.12. There are structures A and M with relations R and S respectively
which are relatively intrinsically d.c.e. such that the degree spectra of R and of S
are incomparable even relative to every cone.
This is a surprising result which is interesting because it says that there is no
“fullness” result for d.c.e. degrees over the c.e. degrees, that is, no result that says
that any degree spectrum on a cone which strictly contains the c.e. degrees contains
all of the c.e. degrees. Also, it implies that the partial ordering of degree spectra
on a cone is not a linear order. The two structures A and M, and the relations R
and S, are as follows.
Example 3.13. Let A be two-sorted with sorts A1 and A2. The ﬁrst sort A1 will
be the tree ω<ω with the relation “is a child of” and the root node distinguished.
The second sort A2 will be an inﬁnite set with no relations. There will be a single
binary relation U of type A1 × A2. Every element of A2 will be related by U to
exactly one element of A1, and each element of A1 will be related to zero, one, or
two elements of A2. The only elements of A1 related to no elements of A2 are those
of the form 0n = 0 ... 0
²
n
. Any other element of the form σˆa is related to one element
of A2 if a is odd, and to two if a is even. The structure A consists of these two sorts
A1 and A2, the “is a child of” relation, the root of the tree, and U.
We say that an element of A1 is of type ⟨n⟩(so possibly of type ⟨0⟩, type ⟨1⟩, or
type ⟨2⟩) if it is related by U to exactly n elements of A2. The relation R on A is
the set of elements of A1 which are related by U to exactly one element of A2, that
is, the elements of type ⟨1⟩.
Example 3.14. Let M be a three-sorted model with sorts M1, M2, and M3. The
sort M1 will be the tree ω<ω, however, instead of deﬁning the tree with the relation
“is a child of,” the tree will be given as a partial order. We will have a relation V
of type M1 × M2 which is deﬁned in the same way as U, except with M1 replacing
A1 and M2 replacing A2. There will be another relation W on M1 × M3 such that
each element of M3 is related by W to an element of M1, and each element of M1
is related to either no elements or one element of M3. An element of M1 will be
related (via W) to an element of M3 exactly if its last entry is odd, but it is not of
the form 0nˆ1.
Once again, we give elements of M1 a “type”. We say that an element of M1 is
of type ⟨n,m⟩if it is related by V to exactly n elements of M2 and by W to exactly
m elements of M3. The possible types of elements are ⟨0,0⟩, ⟨1,0⟩, ⟨1,1⟩, and ⟨2,0⟩.
The relation S on M will be deﬁned in the same way as R, but again A1 is replaced
by M1 and A2 by M2; so S consists of the elements of types ⟨1,0⟩and ⟨1,1⟩. Note


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
27
that every element of B which is in S, except for those of the form 0n1, is of type
⟨1,1⟩, and hence satisﬁes an existential formula which is only satisﬁed by elements
of S.
Both examples have d-free elements over any tuple ¯c; these elements are of the
form 0n for n large enough that no children of 0n appear in ¯c (i.e., the elements of
type ⟨0⟩in A or type ⟨0,0⟩in M). In either structure, any existential formula (over
¯c) satisﬁed by 0n is also satisﬁed by 0n−11, and any existential formula satisﬁed
by 0n−11 is also satisﬁed by 0n−1b for b even. Moreover, the relation R (or S) on
the subtrees of 0n and 0n−1b is the same under the natural identiﬁcation. Both
structures satisfy the eﬀectiveness condition from Proposition 3.9, so for all degrees
d, dgSp(A,R)≤d strictly contains Σ0
1(d).
Note that in A, there is an existential formula ϕ(u) which says that u is of type
⟨2⟩, and an existential formula ψ(u) which says that u is of type ⟨1⟩or of type
⟨2⟩(i.e., of type ⟨n⟩with n ≥1). Similarly, in M, for each n0 and m0 there are
existential formulas which say that an element u is of type ⟨n,m⟩with n ≥n0 and
m ≥m0.
We begin by proving in Proposition 3.15 that there is a Turing degree in the
(unrelativized) degree spectrum of S which is not in the degree spectrum of R before
proving in Proposition 3.17 that there is a Turing degree in the degree spectrum of
R which is not in the degree spectrum of S. After each proposition, we give the
relativized version.
Proposition 3.15. There is a computable copy N of M such that no computable
copy B of A has SN ≡T RB.
Proof. The proof will be very similar to that of Proposition 3.9, though it will not
be as easy to diagonalize as both structures have d-free elements. We will construct
N with domain ω by giving at each stage a tentative ﬁnite isomorphism Fs ∶ω →M.
F = lim Fs will be a bijection, giving N as an isomorphic copy.
We need to diagonalize against computable copies of A. Given a computable
function Φe, we can try to interpret Φe as giving the diagram of a computable
structure Be isomorphic to A.
At each stage, we get a ﬁnite substructure Be,s
which is isomorphism to a ﬁnite substructure of A by running Φe up to stage
s, and letting Be,s be the greatest initial segment on which all of the relations
are completely determined and which is isomorphic to a ﬁnite substructure of A
(because A is relatively simple, this can be checked computably). Let Be be the
union of the Be,s. If Φe is total and gives the diagram of a structure isomorphic
to A, then Be is that structure. Otherwise, Be will be some other, possibly ﬁnite,
structure. For elements of Be,s, we also have an approximation of their type in Be,
by looking at how many elements of the second sort they are connected to in Be,s.
By further reducing the domain of Be,s, we may assume that Be,s has the following
property since A does: all of the elements of Be,s which are of type ⟨0⟩in Be,s are
linearly ordered.
We will meet the following requirements:


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
28
Re,i,j If Be is isomorphic to A, and ΦRBe
i
and ΦSN
j
are total, then either SN ≠ΦRBe
i
or RBe ≠ΦSN
j
.
Si The ith element of M is in the image of F.
Note that the d-free elements of both structures are linearly ordered. Suppose
that in A, p ∉R is d-free (so p = 0ℓfor some ℓ), and q ∉R is d-free over p and
in the subtree below p. Then, using the fact that p is d-free, we can replace it
by p′ ∈R (replacing q by q′) while maintaining any existential formula, and then
we can replace p′ by p′′ ∉R (and q′ by q′′). However, q′′ will no longer be d-free,
because it will not be of the form 0k. The same is true in M. This is what we will
exploit for both this proof and the proof of the next proposition.
The way we will meet Re,i,j will be to put a d-free element x ∉S into N. If
there is no p in Be,s which is d-free, we would be able to diagonalize by moving
x to x′ ∈S, and then later to x′′ ∉S and using appropriate computations as in
Proposition 3.9. So we may assume that there is p in Be,s which is d-free. Now if
Be is an isomorphic copy of A, we will eventually ﬁnd a chain p0,p1,... ,pn = p from
the root node p0 to p, where pi+1 is a child of pi. Then in A every d-free element
aside from p0,... ,pn = p is in the subtree below p.
In N, we just have to respect the tree-order, so no matter how much of the
diagram of N we have build so far, we can always add a new d-free element y such
that x is in the subtree below y. Then we will use the fact described above about
d-free elements which are in the subtree below another d-free element. By moving
x to x′ ∈S and then to x′′ ∉S, we can force p to move to p′ ∈R and then p′′ ∉R.
Then, by moving y to y′ ∈S and then y′′ ∉S, we can diagonalize as Be will have
no d-free elements which it can use: all of the d-free elements which were below p
have now been moved to be below p′′ are are no longer d-free. We could still move
y to y′ and then y′′ as x was in the subtree below y rather than vice versa. As in
Proposition 3.9, we will use various computations to force Be to follow Ne.
The requirement Re,i,j will have associated to it at each stage s values ae,i,j[s],
ue,i,j[s], ve,i,j[s], me,i,j[s], and te,i,j[s], and be,i,j[s], µe,i,j[s], νe,i,j[s], and τe,i,j[s].
These values will never be redeﬁned, but may be canceled. When a requirement
is injured, its corresponding values will be canceled. Figure 3.2 shows how these
values are related.
At each stage, each of the requirements Re,i,j will be in one of the following
states: initialized, waiting-for-first-computation, waiting-for-second-
computation, waiting-for-first-change, waiting-for-second-change, waiting-
for-third-change, or diagonalized. Every requirement will move through these
linearly in that order.
We are now ready to describe the construction.
Construction.
At stage 0, let Fs = ∅and for each e, i, and j let ae,i,j[0], ue,i,j[0], and so on
be 0 (i.e., undeﬁned).


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
29
At a stage s+1, let Fs ∶{0,...,ξs} →M be the partial isomorphism determined
in the previous stage, and let D(Ns) be the ﬁnite part of the diagram of N which
has been determined so far. We have an approximation SN
s
to SN which we get
by taking k ∈SN
s
if Fs(k) ∈S. For each e, we have a guess RBe
s
at RBe using the
diagram of the ﬁnite structure Be,s, given by x ∈RBe
s
if and only if in Be,s, x is of
type ⟨1⟩(i.e., related by U Be,s to exactly one element of the second sort).
We will deal with a single requirement—the highest priority requirement which
requires attention at stage s + 1. A requirement Si requires attention at stage s + 1
if the ith element of A is not in the image of Fs.
If Si is the highest priority
requirement which requires attention, then let c be the ith element of A. Let Fs+1
extend Fs with c in its image. Injure each requirement of higher priority.
The conditions for a requirement Re,i,j to require attention at stage s + 1 de-
pends on the state of the requirement. Below, we will list for each possible state of
Re,i,j, the conditions for Re,i,j to require attention, and the action that the require-
ment takes if it is the highest priority requirement that requires attention. We will
also loosely describe what is happening in the construction, but a more rigorous
treatment will follow.
Initialized The requirement has been initialized, so ae,i,j[0], ue,i,j[0], and so on
are all 0.
Requires attention The requirement always requires attention.
Action Let Fs+1 extend Fs by adding to its image the element 0ℓ, where ℓis large
enough that 0ℓhas no children in ran(Fs). Then 0ℓis d-free over ran(Fs).
Let ae,i,j[s + 1] be such that Fs+1(ae,i,j[s + 1]) = 0ℓ.
Change the state to
waiting-for-first-computation.
Waiting-for-first-computation We have set F(ae,i,j) = 0ℓ∉R a d-free ele-
ment. We wait for the computations (3.5) and (3.6) below. Then, we use
the fact that M is given using the tree-order to insert an element be,i,j in N
above ae,i,j (so that now the image of be,i,j under F is 0ℓand the image of
ae,i,j under F is 0ℓ+1).
Requires attention The requirement requires attention if:
(1) there is a computation
SN
s [0,... ,ae,i,j[s]] = ΦRBe
s
i,s [0,... ,ae,i,j[s]]
(3.5)
with use u < s,
(2) each element p of the ﬁrst sort in Be,s is part of a chain p0,p1,... ,pn = p
in Be,s where p0 is the root node and pi+1 is a child of pi, and
(3) there is a computation
RBe
s [0,... ,m] = ΦSN
s
j,s [0,... ,m]
(3.6)
with use v < s where m ≥u is larger than each pi above.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
30
Action Set ue,i,j[s + 1] = u, ve,i,j[s + 1] = u, me,i,j[s + 1] = m, and te,i,j[s + 1] = s.
Let a = ae,i,j[s]. We have Fs(a) = 0ℓ, where ℓis large enough that no child of
0ℓappears earlier in the image of Fs. Set
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
0ℓ+1σ
Fs(w) = 0ℓσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.
What we have done is taken every element of N which was mapped to the
subtree below 0ℓ, and moved it to the subtree below 0ℓ+1. Now let b = be,i,j[s+
1] be the ﬁrst element on which Fs+1 is not yet deﬁned and set Fs+1(b) = 0ℓ.
So Fs+1(b) is the parent of Fs+1(a). Any existential formula which was true
of the tree below 0ℓis also true of the tree below 0ℓ+1. Also, for w ∈dom(Fs),
Fs(w) ∈R if and only if Fs+1(w) ∈R. Change the state to waiting-for-
second-computation.
Waiting-for-second-computation In the previous state we deﬁned be,i,j, so
now we have to wait for the computations (3.7) and (3.8) below involving it.
Then we modify F so that it now looks like ae,i,j ∈S, breaking the computation
(3.5) above.
Requires attention The requirement requires attention if there are computations
SN
s [0,... ,be,i,j[s]] = ΦRBe
s
i,s [0,... ,be,i,j[s]]
(3.7)
with use µ < s, and
RBe
s [0,... ,µ] = ΦSN
s
j,s [0,... ,µ]
(3.8)
with use ν < s.
Action Set µe,i,j[s + 1] = µ, νe,i,j[s + 1] = ν, and τe,i,j[s + 1] = s. Let a = ae,i,j[s]
and b = be,i,j[s]. We have Fs(a) = 0ℓ+1 and Fs(b) = 0ℓ, where ℓis large enough
that no child of 0ℓappears before a in the image of Fs. Choose x odd and
larger than any odd number we have encountered so far, and deﬁne Fs+1 by
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
0ℓxˆσ
Fs(w) = 0ℓ+1ˆσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.
What we have done is taken every element of N which was mapped to the
subtree below 0ℓ+1, and moved it to the subtree below 0ℓx. Note that Fs+1(b) =
Fs(b) and for w < a, Fs(w) = Fs+1(w). Any existential formula which was true
of the tree below 0ℓis also true of the tree below 0ℓx (but not vice versa, since
0ℓx is of type ⟨1⟩but 0ℓ+1 is of type ⟨0⟩). Also, for w ∈dom(Fs), Fs(w) ∈S
if and only if Fs+1(w) ∈S with the single exception of w = a. In that case,
Fs(a) ∉S and Fs+1(a) ∈S. Change to state waiting-for-first-change.
Waiting-for-first-change In the previous state, we modiﬁed F to break the
computation (3.5).
If we are to have SN = ΦRBe
i
, then RBe must change


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
31
below its use ue,i,j. So some element of Be which was previously of type ⟨0⟩
becomes of type ⟨1⟩, or some element which was previously of type ⟨1⟩becomes
of type ⟨2⟩. When this happens, we modify F (by changing the image of ae,i,j
again) so that SN becomes the same as it was originally (below ν).
Requires attention The requirement requires attention if
RBe
s [0,... ,ue,i,j[s]] ≠RBe
te,i,j[s][0,... ,ue,i,j[s]].
Action Let a = ae,i,j[s] and b = be,i,j[s]. We have Fs(a) = 0ℓx, where x is odd.
Choose y > 0 even and larger than any even number we have encountered so
far, and deﬁne Fs+1 by
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
0ℓyˆσ
Fs(w) = 0ℓxˆσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.
This is moving the subtree below 0ℓx to the subtree below 0ℓy. Once again,
Fs+1(b) = Fs(b) = 0ℓ. For w ∈dom(Fs), w ≠a, we have Fs(w) ∈S if and only
if Fs+1(w) ∈S. For w = a, we have Fs(a) ∈S and Fs+1(a) ∉S. Change the
state to waiting-for-second-change.
Waiting-for-second-change In the previous state, we modiﬁed F so that SN
is the same as it was previously in state waiting-for-first-computation.
By the computation (3.6), RBe must return, below the use ue,i,j, to the way it
was previously (i.e., as it was when the computation (3.6) was found). It must
be that the element from state waiting-for-first-change which changed
its type then (from type ⟨0⟩to type ⟨1⟩or from type ⟨1⟩to type ⟨2⟩) must
now change its type again, and so it must have gone from type ⟨0⟩to type
⟨1⟩and now changes from type ⟨1⟩to type ⟨2⟩. Call this element p. When
this happens, we modify F so that be,i,j looks like it is in SN . We can do this
because so far we have only modiﬁed the image of ae,i,j, and ae,i,j was in the
subtree below be,i,j. This breaks the computation (3.7).
Requires attention The requirement requires attention if
RBe
s [0,... ,µe,i,j[s]] = RBe
te,i,j[s][0,... ,µe,i,j[s]].
and also, each of the elements me,i,j[s] + 1,... ,µe,i,j[s] is of type ⟨1⟩or type
⟨2⟩.
Action Let b = be,i,j[s]. We have Fs(b) = 0ℓ. Choose x > 0 odd and larger than
any odd number we have encountered so far, and deﬁne Fs+1 by
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
0ℓ−1xˆσ
Fs(w) = 0ℓˆσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
32
This is moving the subtree below 0ℓto the subtree below 0ℓ−1x.
For w ∈
dom(Fs), w ≠b, we have Fs(w) ∈S if and only if Fs+1(w) ∈S. For w = b, we
have Fs(b) ∉S and Fs+1(b) ∈S. Change the state to waiting-for-third-
change.
Waiting-for-third-change In the previous state, we broke the computation
(3.7). If we are to have SN = ΦRBe
i
, then RBe must change below the use
µ of this computation. But since SN [0,... ,v] is the same as it was before, by
the computation (3.6), RBe[0,... ,u] cannot change. So RBe must change on
one of the elements u+1,... ,µ. Let p be the element we described in the pre-
vious state. By (2) from state waiting-for-first-computation, the only
elements from among u + 1,... ,µ in Be which can be of type ⟨0⟩are in the
subtree below p. So when, in state waiting-for-first-change, p becomes
of type ⟨1⟩, each of the elements in the subtree below p becomes of type ⟨1⟩
or type ⟨2⟩. So now, when RBe changes on one of the elements u + 1,... ,µ,
it does so by some such element which was of type ⟨1⟩becoming of type ⟨2⟩.
Now modify F so that SN looks the same as it did originally (below ν).
Requires attention The requirement requires attention if
RBe
s [0,... ,µe,i,j[s]] ≠RBe
τe,i,j[s][0,... ,µe,i,j[s]].
Action Let b = be,i,j[s]. We have Fs(b) = 0ℓ−1x. Choose y > 0 even and larger
than any even number we have encountered so far, and deﬁne Fs+1 by
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
0ℓ−1yˆσ
Fs(w) = 0ℓ−1xˆσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.
This is moving the subtree below 0ℓ−1x to the subtree below 0ℓ−1y. For w ∈
dom(Fs), w ≠b, we have Fs(w) ∈S if and only if Fs+1(w) ∈S. For w = b, we
have Fs(b) ∈S and Fs+1(b) ∉S. Change the state to diagonalized.
Diagonalized In the previous state, we made sure that one of the elements u +
1,...,µ of Be which previously looked like it was in RBe is now not in RBe,
so that that element is now of type ⟨2⟩and hence must be in RBe. We also
modiﬁed F so that SN is the same as it was in state initialized (below ν).
Then, by computation (3.8), we cannot have RBe = ΦSN
j
. So we have satisﬁed
Re,i,j.
Requires attention The requirement never requires attention.
Action None.
When a requirement of higher priority than Re,i,j acts, Re,i,j is injured. When
this happens, Re,i,j is returned to state initialized and its values ae,i,j, ue,i,j, etc.
are set to 0. Now injure all requirements of lower priority than the one that acted.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
33
Set D(Ns+1) to be the pullback along Fs+1 of the atomic and negated atomic for-
mulas true of ran(Fs+1) with G¨odel number at most s.
End construction.
If Re,i,j is never injured after some stage s, then it acts at most once at each
stage, and it never moves backwards through the stages. A requirement Si only
acts once if it is not injured. So every requirement is injured only ﬁnitely many
times.
Now we will show that each requirement is satisﬁed. Each requirement Si is
satisﬁed, because there is a stage s after which each lower requirement never acts,
and then at the next stage, Si acts if it is not already satisﬁed, and is never again
injured.
Now suppose that Re,i,j is the least requirement which is not satisﬁed, and let
s be the last stage at which it is injured (or s = 0 if it is never injured). So Re,i,j is
never injured after the stage s. Also, since Re,i,j is not satisﬁed, Be is isomorphic
to A, SN = ΦRBe
i
, and RBe = ΦSN
j
.
Since Re,i,j was just injured at stage s, it in state initialized, and so it requires
attention at stage s1 = s + 1. Then we deﬁne a such that Fs1+1(a) ∉S and change
to state waiting-for-first-computation.
Since SN = ΦRBe
i
, RBe = ΦSN
j
, and Be is isomorphic to A, at some stage t > s1,
Re,i,j will require attention. Thus we get u, m, and v such that
SN
t [0,... ,a] = Φ
RBe
t
i,t [0,... ,a]
(3.9)
with use u and
RBe
t [0,... ,m] = ΦSN
t
j,t [0,... ,m]
(3.10)
with use v. Each element p from among 0,... ,a in Be has a chain in Be,t from
the root node to itself, and each of these nodes is in {0,...,m}. We deﬁne b > m
and Ft+1 such that Ft+1(b) ∉S. Then we change to state waiting-for-second-
computation.
Once again, using the fact that RBe = ΦSN
i
and SN = ΦRBe
j
, at some stage τ > t,
we will have
SN
τ [0,... ,b] = ΦRBe
τ
i,τ [0,... ,b]
(3.11)
with use µ and
RBe
τ [0,... ,µ] = ΦSN
τ
j,τ [0,... ,µ]
(3.12)
with use ν. Note that (3.11) implies that
RBe
τ [0,... ,u] = RBe
t [0,... ,u].
(3.13)
Then Re,i,j requires attention at stage τ + 1. We deﬁne Fτ+1 so that Fτ+1(a) ∈S.
Then we have
SN
τ+1[0,... ,u] ≠SN
τ [0,... ,u]
(3.14)
The state is changed to waiting-for-first-change.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
34
Now by (3.11), (3.14), and the fact that SN = ΦRBe
i
, at some stage s1 > τ, we
have
RBe
s1 [0,... ,u] ≠RBe
t [0,... ,u] = RBe
τ [0,... ,u]
(3.15)
and so Re,i,j requires attention at stage s1 + 1. Fs1+1 is deﬁned such that
SN
s1+1[0,... ,ν] = SN
τ [0,... ,ν].
(3.16)
Then the state is changed to waiting-for-second-change.
Since RBe = ΦSN
j
and using (3.12) and (3.16), at some stage s > s1, we have
RBe
s [0,... ,µ] = RBe
τ [0,... ,µ].
(3.17)
Now by (3.15) and (3.17), there must be some p ∈{0,...,u} such that p ∉RBe
τ ,
p ∈RBe
s1 , and p ∉RBe
s . Then in Be,s, p must be of type ⟨2⟩. All of the elements of Be
from {m + 1,... ,µ} which looked like they were of type ⟨0⟩at stage t were in the
subtree below p, so there is a stage s′ > s at which each of them is of type ⟨1⟩or
type ⟨2⟩. Then, at some stage s2 > s′, we still have
RBe
s2 [0,... ,µ] = RBe
τ [0,... ,µ].
So Re,i,j requires attention at stage s2 + 1. Fs2+1 is deﬁned so that Fs2+1(b) ∈S.
Since we had Fs2(b) ∉S,
SN
s2+1[0,... ,v] = SN
τ [0,... ,v] = SN
t [0,... ,v].
The state is changed to waiting-for-third-change.
So by (3.10) and (3.11) and since RBe = ΦSN
j
, at some stage s3 > s2, we have
RBe
s3 [0,... ,µ] ≠RBe
τ [0,... ,µ]
but
RBe
s3 [0,... ,m] = RBe
τ [0,... ,m]
so that
RBe
s3 [m + 1,... ,µ] ≠RBe
τ [m + 1,... ,µ]
So Re,i,j requires attention. Fs3+1 is deﬁned so that
SN
s3+1[0,... ,µ] = SN
τ [0,... ,µ].
The state is changed to diagonalized.
Since RBe = ΦSN
j
, at some stage s4 > s3, by (3.12), we have
RBe
s4 [0,... ,µ] = RBe
τ [0,... ,µ].
Then in Be, there must be q ∈{m + 1,... ,µ} such that Fs2(q) ∉R, Fs3(q) ∈R,
and Fs4(q) ∉R. Then in Be,s2 at stage s2, q must have looked like it was of type
⟨0⟩. We have already established that all of the elements in {m + 1,... ,µ} were of
type ⟨1⟩or of type ⟨2⟩. This is a contradiction. Hence all of the requirements are
satisﬁed.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
35
The proposition relativizes as follows:
Corollary 3.16. For every degree d, there is a copy N of M with N ≤T d such
that no copy B of A with B ≤T d has SN ⊕d ≡T RB ⊕d.
Now we have the proposition in the other direction, in the unrelativized form:
Proposition 3.17. There is a computable copy B of A such that no computable
copy N of M has RB ≡T SN .
Proof. We will construct a computable copy B of A with domain ω. We will diago-
nalize against every possible Turing equivalence with a computable copy N of M.
We will build B with an inﬁnite injury construction using subrequirements, where
each subrequirement is injured only ﬁnitely many times.
We will construct B by giving at each stage a tentative ﬁnite isomorphism Fs ∶
ω →A. F = lim Fs will be a bijection, giving B as an isomorphic copy. The proof
will be very similar in style to the proof of Propositions 3.9 and 3.15, but there are
some signiﬁcant complications.
We need to diagonalize against computable copies of M. As in the previous
proposition, given a computable function Φe, we can try to interpret Φe as giving
the diagram of a computable structure Ne isomorphic to M. At each stage, we
get a ﬁnite substructure Ne,s isomorphic to a substructure of M. If Φe is total
and gives the diagram of a structure isomorphic to M, then Ne = ⋃Ne,s is that
structure. Otherwise, Ne will be some structure which may be ﬁnite and may or
may not be isomorphic to M. Also, recall that elements of Ne,s have a type which
approximates their type in Ne, and that we can assume that our approximation
Ne,s has the the following property: all of the elements of Ne,s which are of type
⟨0,0⟩in Ne,s are linearly ordered.
We will meet the following requirements:
Re,i,j If Ne is isomorphic to M, and ΦSNe
i
and ΦRB
j
are total, then either RB ≠ΦSNe
i
or SNe ≠ΦRB
j
.
Si The ith element of A is in the image of F.
The strategy for satisfying a requirement Re,i,j is as follows.
The requirement
Re,i,j will have, associated to it at each stage s, values ae,i,j[s], ue,i,j[s], ve,i,j[s],
and te,i,j[s]. Also, for each n, there will be values bn
e,i,j[s], µn
e,i,j[s], νn
e,i,j[s], and
τ n
e,i,j[s]. See Figure 3.3 for a depiction of what these values mean. If Re,i,j is not
satisﬁed, then Ne will be isomorphic to M, and we will have
RB = ΦSNe
i
and SNe = ΦRB
j
.
Thus given, for example, a value for ne,i,j, there will be some ue,i,j such that
RB[0,... ,ne,i,j] = ΦSNe
j
[0,... ,ne,i,j]


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
36
with use ue,i,j.
In the overview of the proof which follows below, we will just
assume that these values (and the corresponding computations) always exist, since
otherwise Re,i,j is trivially satisﬁed. We also write n for ne,i,j etc.
We begin by mapping ne,i,j in B to the d-free element 0ℓin A. Because of the
computation
RB[0,... ,ne,i,j] = ΦSNe
j
,
there must be at least one element in Ne below the use ue,i,j of this computation
which still looks like it could be d-free in Ne, i.e. of type ⟨0,0⟩. If not, we could
modify F to map ne,i,j to 0ℓ−1x where x is odd (so that F(ne,i,j) ∈R) and then
later modify it again to map ne,i,j to 0ℓ−1y where y is even (and so F(ne,i,j) ∉R)
to immediately diagonalize against the computation above (while maintaining, as
usual, any existential formulas). So one of the elements 0,... ,ue,i,j of Ne must look
like an element of the form 0m, i.e., be of type ⟨0,0⟩. All of the elements in M of
the form 0m (i.e., of type ⟨0,0⟩) are linearly ordered; if Ne is isomorphic to M, the
same is true in Ne. Let p be the element from 0,... ,ue,i,j which is of type ⟨0,0⟩
and which is furthest from the root node of all such elements.
Now map b1
e,i,j ∈B to an element of the form 0ℓ11 where ℓ1 ≥ℓ. We claim that
one of the elements ue,i,j + 1,... ,µ1
e,i,j of Ne has to be:
(i) not in the subtree below p and
(ii) of type ⟨0,0⟩or type ⟨1,0⟩.
Otherwise, we will be able to diagonalize to satisfy the requirement Re,i,j in the
following way. First, modify F to map ne,i,j to 0ℓ−1x where x is odd and then to
0ℓ−1y where y is even. Then b1
e,i,j is now mapped to an element of the form ρ1 for
some ρ. This will force p, or some other element between p in the root node, to
enter SNe and then leave SNe. Then p must be look like an element of the form 0mz
for z even, or τz where τ is not of the form 0m. In either case, by assumption each
of the elements ue,i,j + 1,... ,µ1
e,i,j of Ne must now either be of type ⟨1,1⟩or type
⟨2,0⟩(if one of these elements was not before, then it is now as it was in the subtree
below p and p is not of type ⟨0,0⟩). So all of these elements satisfy some existential
formula which forces them to be in SNe (if they are of type ⟨1,1⟩) or which forces
them out of SNe (if they are of type ⟨2,0⟩). Recall that F is now mapping b1
e,i,j to
ρ1 for some ρ. We also have the computations
RB[0,... ,b1
e,i,j] = ΦSNe
j
[0,... ,b1
e,i,j]
with use µ1
e,i,j and
SNe[0,... ,ue,i,j] = ΦRB
i
[0,... ,ue,i,j]
with use ve,i,j. So by now modifying F to map b1
e,i,j to an element of the form
ρz for z even, we now have b1
e,i,j ∉RB. We break the ﬁrst computation, causing
SNe to change below the use µ1
e,i,j. Because of the second computation, SNe must
stay the same on the elements 0,... ,ue,i,j. Thus SNe must change on the elements


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
37
ue,i,j + 1,... ,µe,i,j. But this cannot happen as remarked before. Thus we have
diagonalized and satisﬁed Re,i,j.
Thus, if we cannot diagonalize to satisfy Re,i,j in this way, one of the elements
ue,i,j + 1,... ,µ1
e,i,j of Ne satisﬁes (i) and (ii) above. Choose one such element, and
call it q1.
Deﬁning b2
e,i,j, b3
e,i,j, and so on in the same way, we get q2, q3, and
so on. Thus we ﬁnd, in Ne, inﬁnitely many elements satisfying (i) and (ii). But
if Ne is isomorphic to M, there can only be ﬁnitely many such elements: if p is
the isomorphic image of 0m, then the only elements satisfying (i) and (ii) are the
isomorphic images of 0m′ and 0m′1 for m′ < m.
Thus we force Ne to be non-
isomorphic to Re,i,j and satisfy Re,i,j in that way.
The requirement Re,i,j will have subrequirements Rn
e,i,j for n ≥1. The main
requirement will choose a, while each subrequirement will choose bn. A subrequire-
ment will act only when all of the previous requirements have chosen their values bn.
The main requirement Re,i,j will monitor Ne to see whether it has given us elements
p and qn, and if not, it can attempt to diagonalize. Either the parent requirement
Re,i,j will at some point diagonalize and be satisﬁed, or each subrequirement will
be satisﬁed guaranteeing that Ne is not isomorphic to M.
Because the subrequirements use inﬁnitely many values bn, we need to assign
the subrequirements a lower priority than the main requirement in order to give
the other requirements a chance to act. Re,i,j will be of higher priority than its
subrequirements Rn
e,i,j, and the subrequirements will be of decreasing priority as
n increases. The subrequirements will be interleaved in this ordering, so that, for
example, the ordering might begin (from highest priority to lowest priority):
Re1,i1,j1 > R1
e1,i1,j1 > Re2,i2,j2 > R2
e1,i1,j1 > R1
e2,i2,j2 > R3
e1,i1,j1 > ⋯.
The requirement Re,i,j will have, associated to it at each stage s, the values
ae,i,j[s], ue,i,j[s], ve,i,j[s], and te,i,j[s]. A subrequirement Rn
e,i,j will be associated
with the values bn
e,i,j[s], µn
e,i,j[s], νn
e,i,j[s], and τ n
e,i,j[s]. These values will never be
redeﬁned, but may be canceled. When a requirement is injured, its corresponding
values will be canceled, with one exception. If Re,i,j ﬁnds an opportunity to diago-
nalize using bn
e,i,j[s], then it will protect the values bn
e,i,j[s], µn
e,i,j[s], νn
e,i,j[s], and
τ n
e,i,j[s] using its own priority.
At each stage, each requirement Re,i,j will be in one of the following states: ini-
tialized, waiting-for-computation, next-subrequirement, waiting-for-
change, diagonalized, waiting-for-first-change-n, waiting-for-second-
change-n, or diagonalized-n. The requirement will move through these in the
following order (where, at the branch, the requirement will move along either the
left branch or the right branch, and if it moves along the right branch it does so for
some speciﬁc value of n):


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
38
initialized

waiting-for-computation

next-subrequirement
}④④④④④④④④④④④④
%❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
❑
waiting-for-change

waiting-for-first-change-n

diagonalized
waiting-for-second-change-n

diagonalized-n
When the requirement is in state next-subrequirement, the subrequirements
will begin acting. The requirement will then monitor them for a chance to diagonal-
ize. There are two ways in which the requirement can diagonalize, either by going
to state waiting-for-change if the element p described above does not exist, or
waiting-for-first-change-n if some element qn described above does not exist.
Recall that in the second case, the values bn
e,i,j, µn
e,i,j, νn
e,i,j, and τn
e,i,j are protected
by the requirement Re,i,j at its priority.
Each subrequirement Rn
e,i,j will be in one of three states: initialized, waiting-
for-computation, or next-subrequirement.
The subrequirement will move
through these stages in order. When one subrequirement is in state next-subre-
quirement, it has ﬁnished acting and the next one can begin.
We are now ready to describe the construction.
Construction.
At stage 0, let Fs = ∅and for each e, i, and j let ae,i,j[0], ue,i,j[0], ve,i,j[0], and
te,i,j[0] be ∅. For each n, let bn
e,i,j[0], µn
e,i,j[0], νn
e,i,j[0], and τ n
e,i,j[0] be 0 as well.
At a stage s + 1, let Fs ∶{0,...,ξs} →A be the partial isomorphism determined
in the previous stage, and let D(Bs) be the ﬁnite part of the diagram of B which
has been determined so far. We have an approximation RB
s to RB which we get
by taking k ∈RB
s if Fs(k) ∈R. For each e, we have a guess SNe
s
at SNe using the
diagram of the ﬁnite structure Ne,s, given by x ∈SNe
s
if and only if in Ne,s, x is in
the ﬁrst sort and is related by V Ne,s to exactly one element of the second sort.
We will deal with a single requirement—the highest priority requirement which
requires attention at stage s + 1. A requirement Si requires attention at stage s + 1
if the ith element of A is not in the image of Fs.
If Si is the highest priority
requirement which requires attention, then let c be the ith element of A. Let Fs+1
extend Fs with c in its image. Injure each requirement of higher priority.
The conditions for a requirement Re,i,j or a subrequirement Rn
e,i,j to require
attention at stage s + 1 depend on the state of the requirement. Below, we will list
for each possible state of Re,i,j, the conditions for Re,i,j to require attention, and


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
39
the action that the requirement takes if it is the highest priority requirement that
requires attention. The subrequirements will follow afterward.
Initialized The requirement has been initialized, so ae,i,j[0], ue,i,j[0], and so on
are all 0.
Requires attention The requirement always requires attention.
Action Let Fs+1 extend Fs by adding to its image the element 0ℓ, where ℓis
large enough that 0ℓhas no children in ran(Fs). Let ae,i,j[s + 1] be such that
Fs+1(ae,i,j)[s + 1] = 0ℓ. Change the state to waiting-for-computation.
Waiting-for-computation We have set F(ae,i,j) = 0ℓ∉R a d-free element. We
wait for the computations (3.18) and (3.19) below. Then we can begin to
satisfy the subrequirements.
Requires attention The requirement requires attention if there is a computation
RB
s [0,... ,ae,i,j[s]] = ΦSNe
s
i
[0,... ,ae,i,j[s]]
(3.18)
with use u < s, and
SNe
s [0,... ,u] = ΦRB
s
j
[0,... ,u]
(3.19)
with use v < s.
Action Let u and v be the uses of the computations which witness that this re-
quirement requires attention. Set ue,i,j[s+1] = u, ve,i,j[s+1] = u, and te,i,j[s+
1] = s. We have Fs+1 = Fs. Change the state to next-subrequirement.
Next-subrequirement While in this state, we begin trying to satisfy the sub-
requirements, building elements b1
e,i,j,b2
e,i,j, and so on.
At the same time,
we look for a way to immediately satisfy Re,i,j. The requirement requires
attention during this state if we see such a way to satisfy Re,i,j. There are
two possibly ways that we might immediately diagonalize. The ﬁrst is that
we can diagonalize using only ae,i,j and the computations (3.18) and (3.19),
because none of the elements of Ne below the use ue,i,j of (3.18) are d-free.
The second is that we can diagonalize using ae,i,j and some bn
e,i,j, because we
use ae,i,j to force SNe to change below the use ue,i,j of (3.18), and this will
mean that we can diagonalize by changing bn
e,i,j from being in RB to being
out of RB. If we see a chance to diagonalize, we modify F to put ae,i,j into
RB, breaking the computation (3.18).
Requires attention There are two possible ways that this requirement might re-
quire attention.
The requirement requires attention of the ﬁrst kind if in
Ne,s:
(1) each of the elements 0,... ,ue,i,j[s] of Ne which is in the ﬁrst sort is of
type ⟨1,0⟩, type ⟨1,1⟩, or type ⟨2,0⟩,


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
40
(2) we still have
SNe
s [0,... ,ue,i,j[s]] = SNe
te,i,j[s][0,... ,ue,i,j[s]].
The requirement requires attention of the second kind if for some n:
(1) each of the subrequirements Rm
e,i,j is in state next-requirement for all
m ≤n,
(2) each of the elements µn−1
e,i,j[s] + 1,... ,µn
e,i,j[s] of Ne,s (with µn−1
e,i,j[s] re-
placed by ue,i,j[s] if n = 0) which is in the ﬁrst sort and is either of type
⟨0,0⟩or type ⟨1,0⟩in Ne,s is in the subtree below those elements from
among 0,... ,ue,i,j[s] which are not related to any elements of the second
sort,
(3) we still have
SNe
s [0,... ,µn
e,i,j[s]] = SNe
τ n
e,i,j[s][0,... ,µn
e,i,j[s]].
Action There were two diﬀerent ways in which this requirement might require
attention. The only diﬀerence in the action we take is which state we move
to. Let a = ae,i,j[s]. We have Fs(a) = 0ℓ, where ℓis large enough that no
child of 0ℓappears earlier in the image of Fs. Choose x odd and larger than
any odd number we have encountered so far, and deﬁne Fs+1 by
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
0ℓ−1xˆσ
Fs(w) = 0ℓˆσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.
What we have done is taken every element of C which was mapped to the
subtree below 0ℓ, and moved it to the subtree below 0ℓ−1x. Any existential
formula which was true of the tree below 0ℓis also true of the tree below
0ℓ−1x (but not vice versa, since 0ℓ−1x is connected by U to an element of the
second sort, but 0ℓis not). Also, for w ∈dom(Fs), Fs(w) ∈R if and only if
Fs+1(w) ∈R with the single exception of w = a. In that case, Fs(a) ∉R and
Fs+1(a) ∈R. If the requirement required attention of the ﬁrst kind, change
to state waiting-for-change.
Otherwise, if it required attention of the
second kind, change to state waiting-for-first-change-n where n is the
least witness to the fact that this requirement required attention of the second
kind.
Waiting-for-change In this state, we are trying to diagonalize against Re,i,j in
the ﬁrst way described above. The computation (3.18) was broken, and so
as usual, SNe must change below the use ue,i,j. When we ﬁrst entered this
state, all of the elements 0,...,ue,i,j of Ne were of types ⟨1,0⟩, ⟨1,1⟩, or ⟨2,0⟩
(i.e., were not d-free). So in order for SNe to change below the use ue,i,j,
one of these elements (call it p) which was connected to one element of the
second sort must become connected to two elements of the second sort. We
then modify F to make RB the same as it was originally (below ve,i,j). This


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
41
will successfully satisfy the requirement, because SNe cannot return to the
way it was originally because p cannot return to being in SNe, and so the
computation (3.19) from the state waiting-for-computation means that
we cannot have SNe = ΦRB
j
.
Requires attention This requirement requires attention if
SNe
s [0,... ,ue,i,j[s]] ≠SNe
te,i,j[s][0,... ,ue,i,j[s]].
Action Let a = ae,i,j[s]. We have Fs(a) = 0ℓ−1x, where x is odd and no child of
0ℓ−1x appears earlier in the image of Fs. Choose y > 0 even and larger than
any even number we have encountered so far, and deﬁne Fs+1 by
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
0ℓ−1yˆσ
Fs(w) = 0ℓ−1xˆσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.
This is moving the subtree below 0ℓ−1x to the subtree below 0ℓ−1y. For w ∈
dom(Fs), w ≠a, we have Fs(w) ∈R if and only if Fs+1(w) ∈R. For w = a, we
have Fs(a) ∈R and Fs+1(a) ∉R. Change the state to diagonalized.
Diagonalized In this state, we have successfully satisﬁed Re,i,j in the ﬁrst way
described above.
Requires attention The requirement never requires attention.
Action None.
Waiting-for-first-change-n In this state, we are trying to diagonalize against
Re,i,j in the second way described above. The computation (3.18) was broken,
and so as usual, SNe must change below the use ue,i,j. So some such element
(which we call p) which was connected to no elements of the second sort (i.e.,
of type ⟨0,0⟩) must become connected to one element of the second sort2 (i.e.,
it is now some other type). We then modify F to make RB the same as it was
originally (below ve,i,j).
Requires attention This requirement requires attention if
SNe
s [0,... ,ue,i,j[s]] ≠SNe
te,i,j[s][0,... ,ue,i,j[s]].
Action Do the same thing as in state waiting-for-change, except that instead
of moving to state diagonalized, change to state waiting-for-second-
change-n.
2It is possible for some element which was connected to one element of the second sort to
become connected to two elements, but in this case we will successfully satisfy Re,i,j in much the
same way as above as a byproduct of our general construction.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
42
Waiting-for-second-change-n In the previous state, F was modiﬁed so that
RB is the same as it was originally below ve,i,j. By the computation (3.19)
from state waiting-for-computation, SNe must return to the same as it
was originally below ue,i,j, i.e., the element p from the previous state must
become connected to two elements of the second sort. Now, in state next-
subrequirement, we had the condition (2).
This condition implied that
each of the elements µn−1
e,i,j + 1,... ,µn
e,i,j of Ne which is not either forced to be
in SNe (by being of type ⟨1,1⟩) or forced to be not in SNe (by being of type
⟨2,0⟩) was in the subtree below p. But now p is of type ⟨2,0⟩, and so there
are no such elements below p. So each of µn−1
e,i,j + 1,... ,µn
e,i,j is either forced
to be in SNe or forced to not be in SNe. Now bn
e,i,j in B is currently in RB,
and we can modify F so that bn
e,i,j is not in RB. By the computation (3.20)
below from the nth subrequirement, we cannot have RB = ΦSNe
i
.
Requires attention This requirement requires attention if
SNe
s [0,... ,µn
e,i,j[s]] = SNe
te,i,j[s][0,... ,µn
e,i,j[s]]
and also in Ne,s, each of the elements µn−1
e,i,j[s]+1,... ,µn
e,i,j[s] of Ne,s is either
of type ⟨1,1⟩or of type ⟨2,0⟩in Ne,s.
Action Let a = ae,i,j[s] and b = bn
e,i,j[s]. We have Fs(a) = 0ℓ1−1y for some even
y, and Fs(b) = 0ℓ1−1y0ℓ21. Let ρ = 0ℓ1−1y0ℓ2 so that Fs(b) = ρ1. Choose z > 0
even and larger than any even number we have encountered so far, and deﬁne
Fs+1 by
Fs+1(w) =
⎧⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎩
ρˆzˆσ
Fs(w) = ρˆ1ˆσ
Fs(w)
otherwise
.
This is moving the subtree below ρˆ1 to the subtree below ρˆz.
For w ∈
dom(Fs), w ≠b, we have Fs(w) ∈R if and only if Fs+1(w) ∈R. For w = b, we
have Fs(b) ∈R and Fs+1(b) ∉R. Change the state to diagonalized-n.
Diagonalized-n In this state, we have successfully satisﬁed Re,i,j in the second
way using bn
e,i,j.
Requires attention The requirement never requires attention.
Action None.
In order for a subrequirement Rn
e,i,j to require attention (in any state), there is
a necessary (but not suﬃcient) condition: the parent requirement Re,i,j must be in
state next-subrequirement. If this condition is satisﬁed, then the whether the
requirement requires attention depends on its state:
Initialized The subrequirement has been initialized, so bn
e,i,j, µn
e,i,j, and so on are
all 0. We deﬁne bn
e,i,j[s + 1].


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
43
Requires attention The subrequirement always requires attention.
Action Let Fs+1 extend Fs by adding to its image the element 0ℓ1, where ℓis
large enough that 0ℓhas no children in ran(Fs). Let bn
e,i,j[s + 1] be such that
Fs+1(bn
e,i,j[s + 1]) = 0ℓ1. Change the state to waiting-for-computation.
Waiting-for-computation In the previous state, we deﬁned bn
e,i,j. We now wait
for the computations below.
Requires attention This subrequirement requires attention if there are computa-
tions
RB
s [0,... ,bn
e,i,j[s]] = ΦSNe
s
i
[0,... ,bn
e,i,j[s]]
(3.20)
with use µ < s, and
SNe
s [0,... ,µ] = ΦRB
s
j
[0,... ,µ]
(3.21)
with use ν < s.
Action Set µn
e,i,j[s+1] = µ, νn
e,i,j[s+1] = ν, and τ n
e,i,j[s+1] = s. We have Fs+1 = Fs.
Change the state to next-subrequirement.
Next-subrequirement In the previous state, we found the computations (3.20)
and (3.21). This subrequirement is done acting, and the next subrequirement
can begin.
Requires attention The subrequirement never requires attention.
Action None.
Now we will say what happens when we say that we injure a requirement or
subrequirement. When a requirement Re,i,j is injured, it is returned to state ini-
tialized and its values ae,i,j, ue,i,j, ve,i,j, and te,i,j are set to 0.
Moreover, if
it is in one of the states waiting-for-first-change-n, waiting-for-second-
change-n, or diagonalized-n, then for m ≤n set bm
e,i,j, µm
e,i,j, νm
e,i,j, and τ m
e,i,j to
0.
When a subrequirement Rn
e,i,j is injured, it is returned to state initialized.
Unless its parent requirement Re,i,j is in one of the states waiting-for-first-
change-m, waiting-for-second-change-m, or diagonalized-m for m ≥n,
set bn
e,i,j, µn
e,i,j, νn
e,i,j, and τn
e,i,j to 0.
In this way, by being in one of these
three states waiting-for-first-change-n, waiting-for-second-change-n, or
diagonalized-n the parent requirement can take over control of the values associ-
ated to the subrequirements Rm
e,i,j for m ≤n and protect them with its own priority
level.
Set D(Bs+1) to be the pullback along Fs+1 of the atomic and negated atomic
formulas true of ran(Fs+1) with Godel number at most s.
End construction.
Each requirement and subrequirement, if it is not injured, only acts ﬁnitely many
times. We must show that each requirement is satisﬁed. Suppose not. Then there


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
44
is a least requirement which is not satisﬁed. It is easy to see that a requirement
Si is always eventually satisﬁed, so let Re,i,j be the least requirement which is not
satisﬁed. Then Ne is a computable structure isomorphic to B, RB = ΦSNe
i
, and
SNe = ΦRB
j
.
There is some last stage at which Re,i,j is injured. At this stage Re,i,j and its
subrequirements are in state initialized.
We will use the following fact implicitly throughout the rest of the proof. It is
easy to prove.
Lemma 3.18. If a requirement Re,i,j is never injured after the stage s, then after
the stage s, F is only changed on the domain [0,... ,ve,i,j] by Re,i,j. If a subre-
quirement Rn
e,i,j is never injured after the stage s, then after the stage s, F is only
changed on the domain [0,... ,νn
e,i,j] by Re,i,j. Also, if a requirement Re,i,j is in
one of the states waiting-for-first-change-n, waiting-for-second-change-
n, or diagonalized-n and is never injured after the stage s, then F is only changed
on [0,... ,νn
e,i,j] by Re,i,j.
We will show that eventually Re,i,j enters state diagonalized or diagona-
lized-n and diagonalizes against the two computations above, a contradiction. We
will write a for ae,i,j[s] since the e, i, and j are ﬁxed, and the value is never redeﬁned
since Re,i,j is never injured. Similarly, we write u for ue,i,j[s], µn for µn
e,i,j[s], and
so on.
In state initialized, Re,i,j always requires attention, so we will always deﬁne a
such that Fs(a) = 0ℓfor some ℓand move on to state waiting-for-computation.
Now because RB = ΦSNe
i
and SNe = ΦRB
j
, at some later stage t we will have
computations
RB
t [0,... ,ae,i,j[t]] = ΦSNe
t
i,t [0,... ,ae,i,j[t]]
(3.22)
with use u < t, and
SNe
t
[0,... ,u] = ΦRB
t
j,t [0,... ,u]
(3.23)
with use v < t. Then u, v, and t will be deﬁned to be these values and the require-
ment will move to state next-subrequirement.
Now we have three cases. First, it might be that at some later stage, Re,i,j leaves
state next-subrequirement and enters state waiting-for-change.
Second,
it might be that it enters the state waiting-for-first-change-n.
Third, the
requirement might never leave state next-subrequirement. We have to ﬁnd a
contradiction in each case.
Case 1. Re,i,j leaves state next-subrequirement and enters state waiting-for-
change.
At some stage s1 + 1 > t, Re,i,j requires attention of the ﬁrst kind. We change F
so that Fs1+1(a) ∈R and change to state waiting-for-change.
Now since RB = ΦSNe
i
, at some stage s2 > s1, we have
RB
s2[0,... ,a] = Φ
SNe
s2
i,s2 [0,... ,a]


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
45
and hence, by (3.22) and the fact that Fs2(a) = Fs1+1(a) ≠Ft(a), we have
SNe
s2 [0,... ,u] ≠SNe
t
[0,... ,u].
(3.24)
So the requirement requires attention at stage s2 + 1.
We change F so that Fs2+1(a) ∉R and change to state diagonalized. We make
sure that
RB
s2+1[0,... ,v] = RB
t [0,... ,v]
(3.25)
Since SNe = ΦRB
j
, at some stage s3 > s2, we have
SNe
s3 [0,... ,u] = Φ
RB
s3
j,s3[0,... ,u].
Then by (3.25) and (3.22) we have
SNe
s3 [0,... ,u] = SNe
t
[0,... ,u]
(3.26)
Combining this with (3.24) we see that there is some p in [0,... ,u] with p ∉SNe
t
,
p ∈SNe
s2 , and p ∉SNe
s3 .
Now s1+1 was the stage at which Re,i,j required attention of the ﬁrst kind while
in state next-subrequirement. First of all, this means that
SNe
s1 [0,... ,u] = SNe
t
[0,... ,u]
and so p ∉SNe
s1 .
Also, in Ne,s1, p must be related by V Ne to at least one element of the second
sort (i.e., of one of the types ⟨1,0⟩, ⟨1,1⟩, or ⟨2,0⟩). Since p ∉SNe
s1 , p must be related
to two elements of the second sort, so of type ⟨2,0⟩. But then the same is true at
stage s2, which contradicts the fact that p ∈SNe
s2 .
Case 2. Re,i,j leaves state next-subrequirement and enters state waiting-for-
first-change-n for some n.
The beginning of the proof of this case is the same as the beginning of the
last case (with the states waiting-for-change and diagonalized replaced by
waiting-for-first-change-n and by waiting-for-second-change-n respec-
tively). Only the part of the proof after we conclude that p ∉SNe
s1 , p ∈SNe
s2 , and
p ∉SNe
s3 is diﬀerent—this no longer leads to a contradiction. The requirement is in
state waiting-for-second-change-n.
Since Re,i,j required attention of the second kind at stage s1 +1, the subrequire-
ment Rn
e,i,j must have been in state next-subrequirement. It will have deﬁned,
for m ≤n, bm, µm, νm, and τ m with
RB
τ m[0,... ,bm] = Φ
SNe
τm
i,τ [0,... ,bm]
(3.27)
with use µm, and
SNe
τ m[0,... ,µm] = ΦRB
τm
j,τ
[0,... ,µm]
(3.28)


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
46
with use νm.
Now if q is an element of Ne from among µn−1 + 1,... ,µn, and in Ne,s1 it looks
like q is either of type ⟨1,1⟩or type ⟨2,0⟩, then q has the same type in the diagram at
stage s3. Now since Re,i,j required attention of the second kind while in state next-
subrequirement at stage s1 + 1, any other element q from among µn−1 + 1,...,µn
not satisfying either of the above conditions was in the subtree below p. At stage
s3, p is related by is of type ⟨2,0⟩, and so we can see from the deﬁnition of M that
any q in the subtree below p must be of type ⟨1,1⟩or type ⟨2,0⟩.
Thus at some stage s4 > s3, the requirement requires attention. Each element q
from among µn−1 + 1,... ,µn has been determined to be in either not in SNe if it is
of type ⟨2,0⟩, or in SNe if it is of type ⟨1,1⟩. So for all stages s > s4, we have
SNe
s [µn−1 + 1,... ,µn] = SNe
s4 [µn−1 + 1,... ,µn] = SNe
τ n [µn−1 + 1,... ,µn]
(3.29)
We change F so that Fs4+1(bn) ∉R (while Fτ n(bn) was in R) and
Rs4+1[0,... ,νn−1] = Rτ n[0,... ,νn−1].
This is also true with s4 replaced by any s ≥s4. By (3.28), for suﬃciently large
s > s4 we have
SNe
s [0,... ,µn−1] = SNe
τ n [0,... ,µn−1].
(3.30)
Then since for all s > s4 we have
RB
s [0,... ,bn] ≠RB
τ n[0,... ,bn]
by (3.27) for suﬃciently large s > s4 we have
Ss[0,... ,µn] ≠Sτ n[0,... ,µn].
From this and (3.30), we see that
Ss[µn−1 + 1,... ,µn] ≠Sτ n[µn−1 + 1,... ,µn].
This contradicts (3.29).
Case 3. Re,i,j never leaves state next-subrequirement.
Suppose to the contrary that Re,i,j never requires attention while in state next-
subrequirement. Then for all stages s > t, we have
RB
s [0,... ,v] = RB
t [0,... ,v].
Since SNe = ΦRB
j
and using (3.23), for suﬃciently large stages s we have
SNe
s [0,... ,u] = SNe
t
[0,... ,u].
(3.31)
So for suﬃciently large stages s, R1
e,i,j always requires attention in state initial-
ized. At some stage, each requirement of higher priority than R1
e,i,j has acted, and
so R1
e,i,j is never injured after this point.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
47
Then R1
e,i,j will require attention and we will deﬁne b1 such that Fs(b1) = 0ℓ1
for some ℓand move on to state waiting-for-computation.
Because RB = ΦSNe
i
and SNe = ΦRB
j
, at some later stage τ 1 we will have compu-
tations
RB
τ 1[0,... ,b1] = Φ
SNe
τ1
i,τ 1 [0,... ,b1]
with use µ1 < τ 1, and
SNe
τ 1 [0,... ,µ1] = Φ
RB
τ1
j,τ 1[0,... ,ν1]
with use ν1 < τ 1. Then µ1, ν1, and τ 1 will be deﬁned to be these values and the
requirement will move to state next-subrequirement.
Continuing a similar argument, each of the subrequirements deﬁnes bn, µn, νn,
and τ n such that
SNe
τ n [0,... ,µn] = ΦRBτn
j,τ 1 [0,... ,µn]
(3.32)
with use νn.
Now we claim that Ne is not isomorphic to M.
First, Re,i,j never requires
attention of the ﬁrst kind. Because of (3.31), the only way this is possible is if
there is an element p from among 0,... ,u which is of type ⟨0,0⟩. That is, p is the
isomorphic image of 0ℓin M for some ℓ.
Let n be arbitrary. By (3.32) and the fact that SNe = ΦRB
j
, for suﬃciently large
stages s, we have
SNe
s [0,... ,νn] = SNe
τ n [0,... ,νn].
Then since Re,i,j does not ever require attention of the second kind, there is qn from
νn−1 + 1,... ,νn which is of type ⟨0,0⟩or type ⟨1,0⟩and not in the subtree below p.
But one can easily see form the deﬁnition of M that there cannot be inﬁnitely
many such elements qn, a contradiction.
This proposition relativizes as follows:
Corollary 3.19. For every degree d, there is a copy B of A with B ≤T d such that
no copy N of M with N ≤T d has RB ⊕d ≡T SN ⊕d.
From the relativized versions of these two propositions (Corollaries 3.16 and
3.19), we get Theorem 3.12.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
48
ne,i,j
RB
We
...
ve,i,j
ue,i,j
...
...
...
...
Φi
Φj
Figure 3.1: The values associated to a requirement for Proposition 3.9. An ar-
row shows a computation converging. The computations use an oracle and com-
pute some initial segment of their target. The tail of the arrow shows the use of
the computation, and the head shows the length. So, for example, we will have
RB[0,... ,ne,i,j] = ΦWe
i
[0,... ,ne,i,j] with use ue,i,j.
ae,i,j
SN
RBe
ve,i,j
ue,i,j
me,i,j
...
be,i,j
...
νe,i,j
µe,i,j
...
...
...
...
...
...
Φi
Φj
Figure 3.2: The values associated to a requirement for Proposition 3.15. An arrow
shows a computation converging. The computations use an oracle and compute
some initial segment of their target. The tail of the arrow shows the use of the
computation, and the head shows the length.


CHAPTER 3. D.C.E. DEGREE SPECTRA
49
ne,i,j
RB
SNe
...
ve,i,j
b1
e,i,j
ue,i,j
µ1
e,i,j
ν1
e,i,j
b2
e,i,j
...
...
...
ν2
e,i,j
b3
e,i,j
...
µ2
e,i,j
...
...
...
...
Φi
Φj
Figure 3.3: The values associated to a requirement for Proposition 3.17. An ar-
row shows a computation converging. The computations use an oracle and com-
pute some initial segment of their target.
The tail of the arrow shows the use
of the computation, and the head shows the length of the output. For example,
RB[0,... ,ne,i,j] = ΦSNe
j
with use ue,i,j.


Chapter 4
Degree Spectra of Relations
on the Naturals
In this chapter, we will consider the special case of the structure (ω,<). We will
generally be working with relations on the standard computable copy of this struc-
ture. Downey, Khoussainov, Miller, and Yu [DKMY09] studied relations on ω and
though they were mostly interested in the degree spectra of non-computable rela-
tions, they showed that any computable unary relation R on (ω,<) has a maximal
degree in its degree spectrum, and this degree is either 0 or 0′. Knoll [Kno09] (and
later independently Wright [Wri13]) extended this to show:
Theorem 4.1 (Knoll [Kno09, Theorem 2.2], Wright [Wri13, Theorem 1.2]). Let R
be a computable unary relation on (ω,<). Then either R is intrinsically computable,
or its degree spectrum consists of all ∆0
2 degrees.
For relations which are not unary, Wright was able to show:
Theorem 4.2 (Wright [Wri13, Theorem 1.3]). Let R be a computable n-ary relation
on (ω,<) which is not intrinsically computable.
Then the degree spectrum of R
contains all of the c.e. degrees.
Note that this is the same as the conclusion of Harizanov’s Theorem 1.2 for
this particular structure.
One could adapt Wright’s proof to check Harizanov’s
eﬀectiveness condition. All of these results relativize.
In the case of unary relations on the standard copy of (ω,<), Knoll was able to
classify the possible degree spectra completely—they are either just the computable
degree, or all ∆0
2 degrees. This suggests the following idea: study the partial order
of degree spectra (on a cone) for relations on a single ﬁxed structure (or class of
structures). While in general, we know from §3 that there are incomparable d.c.e.
degree spectra, this is not the case for unary relations on (ω,<); in fact, there are
only two possible degree spectra for such relations.
We know that there are at
least three possible degree spectra for arbitrary relations on (ω,<): the computable
50


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
51
degree, the c.e. degrees, and the ∆0
2 degrees. Are there more, and if so, is there a
nice classiﬁcation of the possible degree spectra?
To begin, we will study the intrinsically α-c.e. relations on ω. We need some
deﬁnitions and a lemma about Lω1,ω-deﬁnable sets which is implicit in Wright’s
work. A signiﬁcant portion of the lemma coincides with Lemma 2.1 of [Mon09].
A partial order is a well-quasi-order if it is well-founded and has no inﬁnite anti-
chains (see, for example, [Kru72] where Kruskal ﬁrst noticed that the same notion
of a well-quasi-order had been used in many diﬀerent places under diﬀerent names).
Note that a total ordering which is well-ordered is a well-quasi-order. There are
two simple constructions that we will use which produce a new well-quasi-ordering
from an existing one. First, if (Ai,≤i) for i = 1,... ,n are partial orders, then their
product A1 × ⋯× An is partially ordered by ¯a ≤¯b if and only if ai ≤i bi for each
i. If each (Ai,≤i) is a well-quasi-order, then so is the product. Second, if (A,≤)
is a partial order, then let P<ω(A) be the set of ﬁnite subsets of A. Deﬁne ≤P on
this set by U ≤P V if and only if for all a ∈U, there is b ≥a in V . If (A,≤) is a
well-quasi-order, then (P≤ω(A),≤P) is a well-quasi-order.
Lemma 4.3. The set of Σin
1 -deﬁnable n-ary relations on (ω,<) over a ﬁxed set of
parameters ¯c is a well-quasi-order under (reverse) inclusion. That is, there is no
inﬁnite strictly increasing sequence, and there are no inﬁnite anti-chains.
Proof. We will begin by considering the relations deﬁned without parameters. Let
R be a Σin
1 n-ary relation. There are various possible orderings of an n-tuple, for
example the entries may be increasing, decreasing, some entries may be equal to
other entries, or many other possible orderings. But however many ways an n-tuple
may be ordered, there are only ﬁnitely possibilities. We can write R as the disjoint
union of its restrictions to each of these orderings. Each of these restrictions is also
Σin
1 -deﬁnable. For any two such relations, we have S ⊆R if and only if each of
these restrictions of S is contained in the corresponding restriction of R. Hence
inclusion on n-ary relations is the product order of the inclusion order on each
of these restrictions, and so it suﬃces to show that each of these restrictions is a
well-quasi-order. Without loss of generality, it suﬃces to show this for increasing
tuples.
Let R be Σin
1 -deﬁnable relation on increasing n-tuples. Then R is deﬁned by a
Σin
1 formula ϕ(¯x). We may assume that ϕ(¯x) can be written in the form
ϕ(¯x) = (x1 < x2 < ⋯< xn) ∧⩔
i
(∃¯y)ψi(¯x, ¯y).
Now each of these disjuncts can be written in turn as the disjunct of ﬁnitely many
formulas χ¯p(¯x) where ¯p = (p1,... ,pn) ∈ωn and χ¯p(¯x) is the formula which say that
x1 < x2 < ⋯< xn and that there are at least p1 elements less than x1, p2 elements
between x1 and x2, and so on. So we can write ϕ(¯x) as the disjunction of such
formulas χ¯p. For each ¯p ∈ωn, let D¯p be the set of solutions to χ¯p(¯x) in ωn. Then
R is the union of some of these sets D¯p.
Then note that ¯p ↦D¯p is an order-maintaining bijection between the product
order ωn and the relations D¯p ordered by reverse inclusion (that is, ¯p ≤¯q in the


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
52
product order if and only if D¯p ⊇D¯q). Since ωn is well-quasi-ordered, the set of
relations D¯p is also well-quasi-ordered. Thus any set of such relations D¯p contains
ﬁnitely many maximal elements ordered under inclusion (or minimal elements or-
dered under reverse inclusion), and each other relation is contained in one of those
maximal elements. In particular, R is the union of ﬁnitely many sets of the form
D¯p. What we have done so far is the main content of Montalb´an’s work in [Mon09,
Lemma 2.1].
Let ¯p = (p0,... ,pn). Now note that the element ˆp = (p0,p0 + p1 + 1,... ,p0 + ⋯+
pn + n −1) is in D¯r if and only if pi ≥ri for each i, in which case D¯p ⊆D¯r. Now
suppose that D¯p ⊆D¯q1 ∪⋯∪D¯qℓ. Then ˆp ∈D¯p and so ˆp ∈D¯qk for some k. Hence
for this k, D¯p ⊆D¯qk. Thus D¯p ⊆D¯q1 ∪⋯∪D¯qℓif and only if, for some k, D¯p ⊆D¯qk.
From this it follows that the partial order on Σin
1 -deﬁnable relations on increasing
n-tuples is isomorphic to the ﬁnite powerset order on ωn. This is a well-quasi-order.
Now we must consider formulas over a ﬁxed tuple of parameters ¯c. Note that
if ϕ(¯x, ¯y) and ψ(¯x, ¯y) are Σin
1
formulas with no parameters, and every solution
of ϕ(¯x, ¯y) is a solution of ψ(¯x, ¯y), then every solution of ϕ(¯c, ¯y) is a solution of
ψ(¯c, ¯y). Thus there is no inﬁnite anti-chain of sets Σin
1 -deﬁnable over ¯c (as any such
anti-chain would yield an anti-chain of sets deﬁnable without parameters).
Now suppose that there is a strictly increasing chain of sets deﬁnable over ¯c,
A1 ⊊A2 ⊊⋯, which are deﬁnable by Σin
1 formulas ϕ(¯c, ¯y). Let B1,B2,... be the
corresponding sets deﬁnable by the formulas ϕ(¯x, ¯y). Then B1,B2,... cannot be
a strictly increasing sequence, nor can it be an anti-chain. Thus for some i < j,
Bi ⊇Bj.
But then Ai ⊇Aj, and so Ai = Aj.
This is a contradiction.
Hence
there is no strictly increasing chain of sets Σin
1 -deﬁnable over ¯c. This completes the
proof.
From now on, by Σin
1 -deﬁnable we mean deﬁnable with ﬁnitely many parameters.
Then:
Corollary 4.4. Let R be a Σin
1 -deﬁnable relation on (ω,<). Then R is deﬁned by
a ﬁnitary existential formula and R is computable (in the standard copy of (ω,<)).
Moreover, R is computable uniformly in the ﬁnitary existential formula and the
tuple ¯c over which it is deﬁned.
Note that while R is computable as a relation on (ω,<), it may not be intrinsi-
cally computable.
Proof. Suppose that R is deﬁnable by a Σin
1 formula ϕ(¯c, ¯y). By the proof of the
previous theorem, ϕ(¯x, ¯y) is a disjunction of ﬁnitely many formulas of the form
χ¯p(¯x, ¯y). Since in (ω,<) we can compute the number of elements between any two
particular elements, the solution set in ω of each of these formulas χ¯p(¯x, ¯y) is a
computable set. Then ϕ(¯x, ¯y) is equivalent to a ﬁnitary existential formula and its
solutions are computable; thus the same is true of ϕ(¯c, ¯y).
Recall that R is said to be intrinsically α-c.e. if in all computable copies B of
A, RB is α-c.e. There is a theorem due to Ash and Knight (Propositions 3.2 and
3.3 of [AK96]), like that of Ash and Nerode [AN81], which relates the notion of


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
53
intrinsically α-c.e. to formally α-c.e. deﬁnitions. The theorem uses the following
notion of α-free for a particular (computable presentation of) an ordinal α. Given
tuples ¯c and ¯a in a structure, we say that ¯a is α-free over ¯c if for any ﬁnitary
existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯x) true of ¯a, and any β < α, there is a ¯a′ satisfying ϕ(¯c, ¯x)
which is β-free over ¯c and such that ¯a ∈R if and only if ¯a′ ∉R. Then there are two
theorems which together describe the intrinsically α-c.e. relations:
Theorem 4.5 (Ash-Knight [AK96, Proposition 3.3]). Let α be a computable ordi-
nal. Let A be a computable structure and R a computable relation on A. Let ¯c be
a tuple. Suppose that no ¯a ∈R is α-free over ¯c, and for each tuple ¯a we can ﬁnd
a formula ϕ(¯c, ¯a) which witnesses this. Also, suppose that for any β < α, we can
eﬀectively decide whether a tuple ¯a is β-free over ¯c, and if not then we can ﬁnd the
witnessing formula ϕ(¯c, ¯a). Then R is formally α-c.e., that is, there are computable
sequences (ϕβ(¯c, ¯x))β≤α and (ψβ(¯c, ¯x))β≤α such that
(1) for all β ≤α and tuples ¯a, if
A ⊧ϕβ(¯c, ¯a) ∧ψβ(¯c, ¯a)
then for some γ < β,
A ⊧ϕγ(¯c, ¯a) ∨ψγ(¯c, ¯a), and
(2) R is deﬁned by
⩔
β<α
(ϕβ(¯c, ¯x) ∧¬ ⩔
γ<β
ψβ(¯c, ¯x))
Theorem 4.6 (Ash-Knight [AK96, Proposition 3.2]). Let α be a computable or-
dinal, A be a computable structure, and R a computable relation on A. Suppose
that for each tuple ¯c, we can ﬁnd a tuple ¯a ∈R which is α-free over ¯c. Suppose if
β ≤α, ¯a is β-free, and given an existential formula ϕ, we can ﬁnd the witness ¯a′ to
β-freeness. Then R is not intrinsically α-c.e.
There is also the usual relationship between relationship between relatively in-
trinsically α-c.e. and formally α-c.e. This was shown in the d.c.e. case by McCoy
[McC02], and also independently McNicholl [McN00] who proved the result for all
n-c.e. degrees. The general theorem for any ordinal α was shown by Ash and Knight
in [AK00].
Theorem 4.7 (Ash-Knight [AK00, Theorem 10.11]). Let α be a computable ordinal,
A be a computable structure, and R a computable relation on A. Then R is relatively
intrinsically α-c.e. if and only if it is formally α-c.e. in the sense of Theorem 4.5.
Finally, note that a relation R is intrinsically α-c.e. on a cone if and only if it has
a formally α-c.e. deﬁnition in the sense of Theorem 4.5 for any countable ordinal
α (not necessarily computable) and where the sequences ϕβ and ψβ are also not
necessarily computable.
We will show that for the structure (ω,<), all of these notions coincide. We begin
by showing that intrinsically α-c.e. implies relatively intrinsically α-c.e. We do this


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
54
by checking in the next two lemmas that in (ω,<), the eﬀectiveness conditions from
Theorems 4.6 and 4.5 are always satisﬁed.
Lemma 4.8. The structure (ω,<) satisﬁes the eﬀectiveness conditions of Theorem
4.6 for any computable relation R and computable ordinal α (i.e., if for each tuple
¯c there is ¯a α-free over ¯c, then we can ﬁnd such an ¯a, etc.).
Proof. Our argument will be very similar to the proof of Theorem 1.3 of [Wri13].
Using similar arguments, we may assume that R is a relation on increasing n-tuples.
Suppose that for each tuple ¯c, there is a tuple ¯a which is α-free over ¯c.
We will show that if ¯a is α-free over the empty tuple, and each element of ¯a is
greater than each element of a tuple ¯c, then ¯a is α-free over ¯c. Let ¯c = (c1,... ,cn)
and let m = max(ci). Then for any existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯x) true of ¯a, there is a
corresponding formula ψ(¯x) which says that there are elements y0 < ⋯< ym smaller
than each element of ¯x, and that yc1,... ,ycn, ¯x satisfy ϕ. Any solution of ϕ(¯c, ¯x)
is also a solution of ψ(¯x), and vice versa (note that if ψ(¯b) holds for some ¯b, then
y0 = 0,... ,ym = m witness the existential quantiﬁer, since ϕ is existential).
Consider for each β ≤α the following sets:
Cβ = {¯a ∶¯a is not β-free over ∅}
and its complement
Fβ = {¯a ∶¯a is β-free over ∅}.
Now suppose that the set
Lα = {min(¯a) ∶¯a ∈Fα}
is not unbounded, say its maximum is m. (Here, min(¯a) is the least entry of ¯a.)
Then consider the (n −1)-ary relations R(0,x1,... ,xn−1), R(1,x1,... ,xn−1), and
so on up to R(m,x1,... ,xn−1). One of these relations must have α-free tuples over
any tuple ¯c. We may replace R with this new relation. Continuing in this way,
eventually we may assume that Lα is unbounded.
Now if ¯a is not β-free, this is because there is a ﬁnitary existential formula ϕ(¯x)
true of ¯a which witnesses that ¯a is not β-free. Thus Cβ can be written in the form
Cβ = (Dβ ∩R) ∪(Eβ ∩¬R)
where Dβ and Eβ are Σin
1 -deﬁnable (and hence computable and deﬁnable by a
ﬁnitary existential formula). Since R is computable, Cβ is computable, and hence
Fβ is computable as well for each β. Moreover, these are uniformly computable,
because the sets Cβ are increasing and the Σin
1 -deﬁnable sets are well-quasi-ordered.
So there are β1,... ,βm ≤α such that C0 = ⋯= Cβ1, Cβ1+1 = ⋯= Cβ2, and so on
until Cβm+1 = ⋯= Cα, and each of these sets are computable.
Thus, for any ¯c, we can ﬁnd some tuple ¯a which is α-free over ¯c (by searching
through Fα for a tuple ¯a all of whose elements are greater than each element of ¯c).
Now suppose that ¯a is β-free over a tuple ¯c for some β ≤α. Then for any γ < β
and existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯x) true of ¯a, there is ¯b satisfying ϕ(¯c, ¯x) and γ-free over
¯c. Note that there must be such a ¯b all of whose elements are greater than each


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
55
element of ¯c, since this true of ¯a, and that any such element of Fγ is γ-free over ¯c.
So we can compute such a ¯b.
Lemma 4.9. (ω,<) satisﬁes the eﬀectiveness condition of Theorem 4.5 for any
computable relation R and ordinal α.
Proof. Fix ¯c. Suppose that there are no α-free tuples over ¯c. For each β ≤α, let
Cβ = {¯a ∶¯a is not β-free over ¯c}.
Once again, Cβ ∩R and Cβ ∩¬R are Σin
1 -deﬁnable over ¯c, and so by the well-quasi-
ordering of such sets, they are uniformly computable and the ﬁnitary existential
deﬁnitions can be uniformly determined. This is enough to have the eﬀectiveness
condition of Theorem 4.6.
Now as a corollary of the previous two lemmas, we can prove the following fact.
Corollary 4.10. Suppose that R is a computable relation on (ω,<) which is intrin-
sically α-c.e. Then R is relatively intrinsically α-c.e.
Proof. Suppose that R is computable and intrinsically α-c.e. for some computable
ordinal α. We must show that R is relatively intrinsically α-c.e., that is, that R is
formally α-c.e.
Claim 4.11. There is a tuple ¯c such that no ¯a ∈R is α-free over ¯c.
Proof. Suppose for a contradiction that for each tuple ¯c, there is ¯a ∈R which is
α-free over ¯c. By Theorem 4.6 and Lemma 4.8, R is not intrinsically α-c.e. This
contradicts the fact that R is intrinsically α-c.e.
Now let ¯c be as in the claim. By Theorem 4.5 and Lemma 4.9, R is formally
α-c.e., and hence relatively intrinsically α-c.e.
Now we use this to show that the notions of intrinsically α-c.e., relatively in-
trinsically α-c.e., and intrinsically α-c.e. on a cone all coincide for (ω,<). One can
view this as saying that (ω,<) and every relation on it are “natural.”
Proposition 4.12. If R is a relation on (ω,<) and α is any ordinal, then if R
is intrinsically α-c.e. on a cone then R is computable and intrinsically m-c.e. for
some ﬁnite m.
Proof. Now suppose that R is a possibly non-computable relation on (ω,<), α is a
possibly non-computable countable ordinal, and R is intrinsically α-c.e. on a cone.
Then there are sets Aβ and Bβ for β < α which are Σin
1 -deﬁnable over a tuple ¯c such
that
R = ⋃
β<α
(Aβ −⋃
γ<β
Bγ)
and if x ∈Aβ∩Bβ then for some γ < β, X ∈Aγ ∪Bγ. We may replace Aβ by ⩔γ≤β Aβ
for each β, and similarly for Bβ. Then the sequences Aβ and Bβ are increasing in


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
56
β. Since the Σin
1 -deﬁnable relations form a well-quasi-order under inclusion, there is
some sequence 0 = β1,... ,βm ≤α such that Aγ and Bγ are constant on the intervals
[β1 = 0,β2), [β2,β3), and so on up to [βm,α]. Otherwise, we could construct an
inﬁnite strictly increasing chain. So
R = (Aβm −Bβm−1) ∪(Aβm−1 −Bβm−2) ∪⋯∪Aβ1
Suppose that x ∈Aβi ∩Bβi. Then for some least γ < βi, x ∈Aγ ∪Bγ. By the
minimality of γ, γ ≤βi−1. Thus, for some j < i, x ∈Aβj ∪Bβj.
Since each of these sets Aβi and Bβj is Σin
1 -deﬁnable, they are all computable
subsets of ω which are deﬁnable by a ﬁnitary existential (and hence Σc
1) formula.
Thus R is intrinsically m-c.e. and R is computable.
Proposition 4.13. Let R be a relation on (ω,<). Then the following are equivalent
for any computable ordinal α:
(1) R is intrinsically α-c.e. and computable in (ω,<),
(2) R is relatively intrinsically α-c.e.,
(3) R is intrinsically α-c.e. on a cone.
In this case, R is intrinsically m-c.e.
Proof. Corollary 4.10 shows that if R is intrinsically α-c.e.
and computable in
(ω,<), then R is relatively intrinsically α-c.e.
If R is relatively intrinsically α-c.e., then R is formally α-c.e., and hence intrin-
sically α-c.e. on a cone.
The previous proposition shows that if R is intrinsically α-c.e. on a cone, then
it is intrinsically α-c.e. and computable in (ω,<).
Now we will show that any intrinsically α-c.e. relation on (ω,<) (which must be
m-c.e. for some m) is intrinsically of c.e. degree. One example of such a relation is
the intrinsically d.c.e. relation S consisting of pairs (a,b) which are separated by
exactly one element. In any computable copy, S computes the adjacency relation
(which is always co-c.e.). Two elements a and b are adjacent if and only if there
is some c > b such that c and a are separated by a single element (which is b), and
so the adjacency relation is c.e. in S in any computable copy of (ω,<). Since it
is always co-c.e., it is always computable in S. On the other hand, the adjacency
relation in any computable copy computes an isomorphism between that copy and
(ω,<), and hence computes S in that copy. Thus we see that S is intrinsically of
c.e. degree. The proof of the following proposition is just a generalization of this
idea.
Note that it is possible to have a relation which is formally ∆0
2 but not formally
α-c.e. for any computable ordinal α. There is a formally ∆0
2 relation R on a structure
A whose degree spectrum, relativized to any degree d, consists of all of the ∆0
2(d)
degrees. The degree spectra of any formally α-c.e. relation does not consist, relative
to any degree d, of all of the ∆0
2(d) degrees. This is in contrast to the ∆0
2 degrees,


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
57
all of which are ω2-c.e. for some computable presentation of ω2 (see Theorem 8 of
[EHK81]).
Proposition 4.14. Let R be an intrinsically m-c.e. n-ary relation on (ω,<) for
some ﬁnite m. Then R is intrinsically of c.e. degree.
Proof. Let A1 ⊋⋯⊋Am be intrinsically Σ0
1 sets such that (depending on whether
m is odd or even) either
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−1 −Am)
or
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−2 −Am−1) ∪Am.
We claim that in any computable copy B ≅(ω,<), from RB we can compute the
successor relation on B. The successor relation computes the isomorphism between
B and (ω,<) and hence computes RB. The successor relation is intrinsically Π0
1 and
hence of c.e. degree, so this will suﬃce to complete the proof.
We will begin with a simple case to which we will later reduce the general case.
For ¯p ∈N n, let E¯p = D0ˆ¯p, that is, E¯p consists of those ¯x = (x1,... ,xn) such that
there are p1 points between x1 and x2, p2 point between x2 and x3, and so on (but
no restriction on the number of points before x1).
Claim 4.15. Suppose that B ⊆A are intrinsically Σ0
1 sets of the form
A = E¯p1 ∪⋯∪E¯pℓ1
and
B = E¯q1 ∪⋯∪E¯qℓ2 .
Furthermore, suppose that A ≠B and B ≠∅, A −B ⊆R, and B ⊆¬R. Then R
computes the successor relation.
Proof. Choose j such that E¯qj is not contained in any of the others, and is not
equal to E¯pi for any i. Some such j exists because A −B is non-empty.
Now, in the proof of Lemma 4.3 we showed that if
E¯qj ⊆E¯p1 ∪⋯∪E¯pℓ2
then E¯qj ⊂E¯pi for some i (though we showed this with E replaced by D, the same
result still applies here). Fix such an i. There must be some index t ∈{1,...,n}
such that ¯pi(t) < ¯qj(t).
Then let
¯u = (u1,... ,un) = (¯qj(1), ¯qj(2),... , ¯qj(t) −1,... , ¯qj(n))
and
¯v = (v1,... ,vn) = ¯qj.
Thus ui = vi except for i = t, in which case vi = ui + 1. So E¯v ⊆E¯u.


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
58
Now E¯v = E¯qj ⊆B and E¯u ⊆E¯pi ⊆A. Moreover, if, for any ¯w, E¯v ⊆E ¯
w ⊆E¯u,
then either E ¯
w = E¯u or E ¯
w = E¯v.
So, by the choice of j, we have
E¯u −E¯v ⊆A −B ⊆R
and
E¯v ⊆B ⊆¬R.
Let B be a computable copy of (ω,<). Let S be the successor function on B.
We claim that, using RB, we can compute S. Suppose that we wish to compute
whether an element y is the successor of x. We can, in a c.e. way, ﬁnd out if y is not
the successor of x, so we just need to show how to recognize that y is the successor
of x if this is the case. We can non-uniformly assume that we know some initial
segment of B, say the ﬁrst t + u1 + ⋯+ ut + 1 elements.
First, we must have x < y. If x ≤t + u1 + ⋯+ ut, then we can non-uniformly
decide whether y is the successor of x. Otherwise, search for z1 < z2 < ⋯< zt−1 <
x < y = zt < ⋯< zn such that
(1) there u1 elements between z1 and z2, u2 elements between z2 and z3, and so
on,
(2) there are ut −1 elements between zt−1 and x, and
(3) (z1,... ,zn) ∈RB.
Then since (z1,... ,zn) ∈D¯u, and D¯v ⊆¬R,
(z1,... ,zn) ∈D¯u −D¯v.
In particular, there cannot be more than vt elements between zt−1 and zt.
As
zt−1 < x < y = zt, and there are ut = vt −1 elements between zt−1 and x, y is the
successor of x. If y is the successor of x and x ≥t + u1 + ⋯+ ut, then it is possible
to ﬁnd such elements z1,... ,zn.
Now we will ﬁnish the general case. Let B be a computable copy of (ω,<) and
let S be the successor relation on B. Suppose that
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−1 −Am)
or
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−2 −Am−1) ∪Am
where each of these sets is an intrinsically Σ0
1 set deﬁnable over constants ¯c.
Let M be a constant greater than each entry of ¯c. Then we can non-uniformly
know the successor relation restricted to {0,... ,M}. It remains to compute the
successor relation on {M,M + 1,...}n. View R as a relation on {M,M + 1,...}n,
which is essentially the same as ωn under the natural identiﬁcation M →0, M +1 →


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
59
1, and so on. So we have reduced to the case where (for some possibly smaller m)
we have
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−1 −Am)
or
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−2 −Am−1) ∪Am
and each of these sets is intrinsically Σ0
1 and deﬁnable without parameters.
Now each Ai is a union of sets of the form D¯p for ¯p ∈Nn+1. Let N be larger
than the ﬁrst entry p0 of each of these tuples ¯p. Then make the same reduction as
before to reduce to the case where each Ai is a union of sets E¯q.
Now if
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−1 −Am)
then A = Am−1 and B = Am are both as in the claim above. If
R = (A1 −A2) ∪(A3 −A4) ∪⋯∪(Am−2 −Am−1) ∪Am
then A = Am−1 and B = Am are as in the claim above, except with R and ¬R
interchanged.
So far, we still only know of three possible degree spectra for a relation on (ω,<):
the computable degree, the c.e. degrees, and the ∆0
2 degrees. It is possible that there
is another degree spectrum in between the c.e. degree and the ∆0
2 degrees, but we
do not know whether such a degree spectrum exists. This is the main open question
of this section:
Question 4.16. Is there a relation on (ω,<) whose degree spectrum is strictly
contained between the c.e. degrees and the ∆0
2 degrees on a cone?
This question appears to be a diﬃcult one. If the answer to the question is no,
that such a degree spectrum cannot exist, and the proof was not too hard, then it
would probably be of the following form. Let R be a relation on (ω,<). Working on
a cone, there is a computable function f such that given an index e for a computable
function ϕe(x,s) of two variables which is total and gives a ∆0
2 approximation of
a set C, f(e) is an index for a structure A isomorphic to (ω,<) with RA ≡T C. If
ϕe(x,s) does not give a ∆0
2 approximation, then we place no requirements on f(e).
Moreover, if the coding is simple, then we will have indices g1(e) and g2(e) for the
computations RA ≤T C and C ≤T RA respectively. We capture this situation with
the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 4.17. Let A be a structure and R a relation on A. Let Γ be a class of
degrees indexed by some subset of ω which relativizes. Then the degree spectrum
of R is uniformly equal to Γ on a cone if, on a cone, there are computable functions
f, g1, and g2 such that given an index e for C ∈Γ, the computable structure A with
index f(e) has
RA = ΦC
g1(e) and C = ΦRA
g2(e).


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
60
We do not know of any relations which are not uniformly equal to their degree
spectrum.
Question 4.18. Must every relation obtain its degree spectrum uniformly on a
cone?
This question is not totally precise, because we have not classiﬁed all possible
degree spectra on a cone and so we do not have an indexing for each of them. But
this question is precise for relations with particular degree spectra, such as the c.e.
degrees or the ∆0
2 degrees.
Theorem 4.19 below says that one of the two questions we have just introduced
is resolved in an interesting way: either there is a relation R on (ω,<) with degree
spectrum all of the ∆0
2 degrees, but not uniformly, or the relation R has a degree
spectrum contained strictly in between the c.e. degrees and the ∆0
2 degrees.
If the answer to Question 4.16 is no, that there are only three possible degree
spectra for a relation on (ω,<), then by Theorem 4.19 the answer to Question 4.18
must also be no. If the answer to Question 4.16 is yes, then the answer to Question
4.18 might be either yes or no.
If the answer to Question 4.16 is yes, there are more than three possible degree
spectra, then we can ask what sort of degree spectra are possible. We know that
any relation which is intrinsically α-c.e. has degree spectra consisting only of the
c.e. degrees, but can there be a relation which is intrinsically of α-c.e. degree, while
not being intrinsically of c.e. degree?
We are now ready to prove Theorem 4.19.
Theorem 4.19. There is a relation R on (ω,<) whose degree spectrum is not
uniformly equal to the ∆0
2 degrees on a cone, but strictly contains the c.e. degrees.
Proof. We will begin by working computably, and everything will relativize. We
will exhibit the relation R and show that there is a computable function h which,
given indices e,i,j, produces a ∆0
2 set C with index h(e,i,j) such that if e is the
index for a computable structure A isomorphic to (ω,<), then either RA ≠ΦC
i or
C ≠ΦRA
j
. Note that h(e,i,j) will be total and will always give an index for a ∆0
2
set, even if e is not an index of the desired type. We will also show that R is not
intrinsically of c.e. degree. The construction of R and h will follow later, but ﬁrst
we will show that such an R has a degree spectrum which is not uniformly equal to
the ∆0
2 degrees.
Suppose to the contrary that there are computable functions f, g1, and g2
such that, given an index e for a function ϕe(x,s) which is total and gives a ∆0
2
approximation of a set C, f(e) is the index of a computable copy A of (ω,<) with
RA = ΦC
g1(e) and C = ΦRA
g2(e).
Then we would like to take the composition θ(e) = h(f(e),g1(e),g2(e)), except
that this may not be total when applied to indices e where ϕe(x,s) is either not
total or not a ∆0
2 approximation. So instead deﬁne h as follows. Given an input
e, we will deﬁne a ∆0
2 set uniformly by giving an approximation by stages. Try to


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
61
compute f(e), g1(e), and g2(e), and while these does not converge, make the ∆0
2
approximation equal to zero. When they do converge, compute h(f(e),g1(e),g2(e))
(since h is total, this will always converge and give an index for a ∆0
2 set) and have
our approximation instead follow the ∆0
2 set with index h(f(e),g1(e),g2(e)). Thus
θ(e) = h(f(e),g1(e),g2(e)) whenever the right hand side is deﬁned, and is an index
for the empty set otherwise.
Now, by the recursion theorem, there is a ﬁxed point e of θ, so that
ϕθ(e)(x,s) = ϕe(x,s).
Now the left hand side is always total and is a ∆0
2 approximation, so the same is
true of the right hand side. Thus θ(e) = h(f(e),g1(e),g2(e)). Let C be the ∆0
2 set
with this approximation, so that C has indices e and θ(e). Thus f(e) is the index
of a computable copy A of (ω,<) with
RA = ΦC
g1(e) and C = ΦRA
g2(e).
But then by deﬁnition of h,
RA ≠ΦC
g1(e) or C ≠ΦRA
g2(e).
This is a contradiction. Hence no such functions f, g1, and g2 can exist, and the
degree spectrum of R is not uniformly equal to the ∆0
2 degrees on a cone.
Construction of R.
We will begin by deﬁning an, bn, and cn with a1 < b1 = c1 < a2 < b2 < c2 < a3 < ⋯.
Begin with a1 = 0. Let bn = an+n+1, cn = bn+an, and an+1 = cn+n+1. This divides
ω up into disjoint intervals [an,bn), [bn,cn), and [cn,an+1) as n varies. Note that
b1 = 2 = c1, and so the interval [b1,c1) is empty. Every other interval is non-empty.
Also, the length of the interval [bn,cn) is the same as the length of the interval
[0,an).
The relation R will be a binary relation which we can interpret as a directed
graph. For each n, we will have cycles of edges
an ↔an + 1 ↔an + 2 ↔⋯↔an + n ↔an
and
cn ↔cn + 1 ↔cn + 2 ↔⋯↔cn + n ↔cn.
These edges all go in both directions; i.e., there is an edge from an to an + 1 and
from an + 1 to an.
Now add an edge from an to cn. These edges are directed, and go from the
smaller element to the larger element. Also, add edges from y to cn + n for all
y ≥an+1.
These edges are also directed, but go from the larger element to the
smaller element. By looking at whether an edge goes in both directions, in the
increasing direction, or in the decreasing direction, we can decide what type of edge


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
62
0
a1
1
2
b1 = c1
3
4
a2
5
6
7
b2
8
9
10
11
c2
12
13
14
a3
15
Figure 4.1: The relation R on the ﬁrst sixteen elements of (ω,<).
The arrows
↔are those from the cycles an ↔an + 1 ↔an + 2 ↔⋯↔an + n ↔an and
cn ↔cn + 1 ↔cn + 2 ↔⋯↔cn + n ↔cn. The arrows ⇢(which curve above) are
those between an and cn for some n. The arrows ⇠(which curve below) are those
from y to cn + n for y ≥an+1.
it is (i.e., is it from a cycle, from an to cn for some n, or from y to cn + n for some
n and some y ≥an+1).
For x,y ∈[bn,cn), put an edge from x to y if and only if there is an edge from
(x −bn) to (y −bn). So the relation R on the interval [bn,cn) looks the same as it
does on the interval [0,an). This completes the deﬁnition of the relation R. Note
that R is computable. Figure 4.1 shows the relation R on an initial segment of ω.
We say that elements ¯y = (y0,y1,... ,ym) of (ω,<) form an m-cycle (for m ≥1)
if y0 < y1 < ⋯< ym and there is a cycle
y0 ↔y1 ↔⋯↔ym ↔y0
and there are no other edges between any of the yi. An m-cycle is really an m + 1-
cycle of the graph. Note that every m-cycle is either
am ↔am + 1 ↔⋯↔am + m ↔am,
or
cm ↔cm + 1 ↔⋯↔cm + m ↔cm,
or contained in [bn,cn) for some n > m.
Remark 4.20. Each element x ∈ω is part of exactly one m-cycle for some m.
Proof. This can easily be seen by an induction argument on the n such that x ∈
[an,cn). If x is in [an,bn) or [cn,an+1) then this is obvious, and if x is in [bn,cn)
then this follows by the induction hypothesis.


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
63
If ¯x = (x0,... ,xm) and ¯y = (y0,... ,ym) are m-cycles and there are edges between
x0 and y0 and vice versa, then we say that ¯x and ¯y are a matching pair of m-cycles.
Each m-cycle is part of a matching pair of m-cycles.
Remark 4.21. If ¯x = (x0,... ,xm) and ¯y = (y0,... ,ym) are a matching pair of m-
cycles, then there is some n such that both ¯x and ¯y are contained in [an,an+1).
Proof. Since ¯x and ¯y form a matching pair, there is an edge from x0 to y0 but not
vice versa. We can see by the deﬁnition of R that either ¯x = (am,... ,am + m) and
¯y = (cm,... ,cm + m), or ¯x and ¯y are both contained in [bn,cn) for some n.
Remark 4.22. If ¯u = (u0,... ,um) and ¯v = (v0,... ,vm) are a matching pair of m-
cycles, and ¯x = (x0,... ,xm) and ¯y = (y0,... ,ym) are another matching pair of
m-cycles (for the same m), then the relation R restricted to the interval [u0,vm]
is the same as the relation R restricted to the interval [x0,ym]. In particular, the
lengths of these intervals are the same: vm −u0 = ym −x0.
Proof. We may assume that ¯u = (am,... ,am+m) and ¯v = (cm,... ,cm+m). Suppose
to the contrary that there are ¯x = (x0,... ,xm) and ¯y = (y0,... ,ym) a matching pair
of m-cycles such that the relation R restricted to the interval [u0,... ,vm] is not
the same as the relation R restricted to the interval [x0,... ,ym]. Assume that x0
is least with this property.
Now by the previous fact, ¯x and ¯y are contained in [an,an+1) for some n. We
must have x0 > cm +m, and so n > m. Then ¯x and ¯y are contained in [bn,cn). Then
by deﬁnition of R, ¯x′ = (x0 −bn,... ,xm −bn) and ¯y′ = (y0 −bn,... ,ym −bn) are a
matching pair of m-cycles and R restricted to the interval [x0,... ,ym] is the same
as R restricted to the interval [x0−bn,... ,ym−bn]. But by the induction hypothesis,
R restricted to the interval [x0 −bn,... ,ym −bn] is the same as R restricted to the
interval [u0,... ,vm]. This contradiction ﬁnishes the proof.
In any computably copy A of (ω,<), using RA as an oracle, we can compute for
each x ∈A the unique m-cycle in which x is contained, x’s position in that cycle,
and we can compute the other m-cycle with which this m-cycle forms a matching
pair.
R is not intrinsically of c.e. degree.
Let ¯c be a tuple and an be such that ¯c < an.
We will show that the tuple
¯a = (an,... ,an + n) is d-free over ¯c. First, we will introduce some notation. Given
a tuple ¯x = (x0,... ,xn), and r ∈ω, write ¯x + r for (x0 + r,... ,xn + r).
Recall what it means for ¯a to be d-free over ¯c: for every ¯b and existential formula
ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) true of ¯a,¯b, there are ¯a′ and ¯b′ which satisfy ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) such that R restricted
to tuples from ¯c¯a′ is not the same as R restricted to tuples from ¯c¯a and also such
that for every existential formula ψ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) true of them, there are ¯a′′,¯b′′ satisfying
ψ and such that R restricted to ¯c¯a′′¯b′′ is the same as R restricted to ¯c¯a¯b.
Figure 4.2 shows the choices of ¯a′, ¯b′, etc. in one particular example. Given ¯b and
some existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) true of ¯a,¯b, we may assume that ϕ is quantiﬁer-
free by expanding ¯b. Then ϕ just says that ¯c¯a¯b are ordered in some particular way.


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
64
0
a1
1
2
b1 = c1
3
4
a2
5
6
7
b2
8
9
10
11
c2
12
13
14
a3
15
¯a
¯b
¯a′
¯b′
¯e
¯a′′
¯b′′
¯e′
Figure 4.2: The choice of ¯a′, ¯b′, ¯a′′, ¯b′′, and ¯e′. The ﬁgure shows the case when
¯c = ∅, we choose ¯a = (0,1), and ¯b = ¯b2 = (2,3). We choose k = 2 so that bk = b2 = 7.
Now, some of the entries of ¯b are less than an, and the rest are greater than or equal
to an. Rearranging ¯b as necessary, write ¯b = ¯b1¯b2 where each entry of ¯b1 is less than
an, and each entry of ¯b2 is greater than or equal to an. Let ¯a′ = ¯a + 1 (recall that
this is shifting each entry by one) and ¯b′ be ¯b1¯b′
2 where ¯b′
2 = ¯b2 + 1. Then ¯c¯a′¯b′ are
ordered in the same way as ¯c¯a¯b and hence still satisfy ϕ. Also, the valuation of R
on ¯a is diﬀerent from that of R on ¯a′, since there are edges between an and an + n,
but not between an + 1 and an + n + 1 = bn.
Now suppose that ψ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) is some further existential formula true of ¯c¯a′¯b′. Let
¯e be the witnesses to the existential quantiﬁers, and χ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v, ¯w) be the quantiﬁer-
free formula which holds of ¯c¯a′¯b′¯e. Write ¯e = ¯e1¯e2 with each entry of ¯e1 less than
an, and each entry of ¯e2 greater than or equal to an. Let k be such that bk is larger
than all of the entries of ¯a and ¯b. Let ¯a′′ = ¯a + bk, ¯b′′ = ¯b1¯b′′
2 where ¯b′′
2 = ¯b2 + bk, and
¯e′ = ¯e1¯e′
2 where ¯e′
2 = ¯e + bk. Then ¯c¯a′′¯b′′¯e′ is ordered in the same way as ¯c¯a′¯b′¯e, and
so ¯c¯a′′¯b′′¯e′ satisﬁes χ. Thus ¯c¯a′′¯b′′ satisﬁes ψ. We need to show that the relation R
restricted to ¯c¯a′′¯b′′ is the same as R restricted to ¯c¯a¯b.
Note that ¯a′′ and ¯b′′
2 are contained in the interval [bk,ck). By deﬁnition of R,
there is an edge between x and y in [bk,ck) if and only if there is an edge between
x −bk and y −bk. Since ¯a′′ = ¯a + bk and ¯b′′
2 = ¯b2 + bk, R restricted to ¯a′′ and ¯b′′
2 is the
same as R restricted to ¯a and ¯b2. Now ¯c and ¯b1 are contained in the interval [0,an).
There are no edges from some x < an to some y ≥an. Note from the construction
of R that there is an edge from x ≥an to y < an if and only if there is an edge from
every z ≥an to y. This completes the proof that R restricted to ¯c¯a¯b is the same as
R restricted to ¯c¯a′′¯b′′.
So for any tuple ¯c, there is a tuple ¯a which is d-free over ¯c. Moreover, everything
was eﬀective. Thus, by Proposition 3.9, the degree spectrum of R contains a non-c.e.


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
65
degree.
Construction of h.
Let e be an index for a computable function ϕe, which we attempt to interpret
as the diagram of a computable structure A. Let i and j be indices for the Turing
functionals Φi and Φj. We will build a ∆0
2 set C such that if A is a computable
copy of (ω,<), then either
C ≠ΦRA
i
or RA ≠ΦC
j .
By constructing C via a ∆0
2 approximation uniformly from e, i, and j we will obtain
the required function h.
At each stage s, we get a ﬁnite linear order As which approximates A. Now,
the domain of As is contained in ω, but A may also be isomorphic to ω. To avoid
confusion, when we say ω, we refer to the underlying domain of As, and by (ω,<)
we mean the structure as a linear order. We may assume that the elements of As
form a ﬁnite initial segment of the domain ω. To diﬀerentiate between the ordering
(as part of the language of the structure) on As and the underlying order on the
domain as a subset of ω, we will use ⪯A for the former and ≤for the latter. We
can write the elements of As as xs
1 ≺A xs
2 ≺A ⋯≺A xs
n, and given z ∈ω, we write
Ns(z) = k if z = xs
k. So Ns(z) is a guess at which element of ω the element z
represents. For z ∈A, let N(z) ∈(ω,<) be the element which z is isomorphic to
(if A is isomorphic to (ω,<)). We also get an approximation RA
s of RA by setting
z ∈RA
s if and only if Ns(z) ∈R. Then RA
s is a ∆0
2 approximation of RA in the case
that A is isomorphic to (ω,<).
The general idea of the construction is as follows. At each stage s, we will have
ﬁnite set Cs such that C(n) = lims→∞Cs(n). If we do not explicitly say that we
change C from stage s to stage s + 1, then we will have Cs+1 = Cs. Suppose that at
stage s we have Cs(0) = 0 and we have computations
Cs(0) = 0 = ΦRA
s
i,s (0)
with use u and
RA
s [0,... ,u] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,u]
with use v. By putting 0 into C, we destroy the ﬁrst computation, forcing RA
s to
change below the use u (or else we are done); then, by removing 0 from C, because
of the second computation we force RA
s , at some later stage t, to change back to the
way it was before (i.e., RA
s [0,... ,u] = RA
t [0,... ,u]). This means that some q ≤u
in A must have had some element enumerated below it, so that Nt(q) > Ns(q).
By moving 0 in and out of C in this way, we can force arbitrarily many elements
to be enumerated below one of [0,... ,u]. If we could enumerate inﬁnitely many
such elements, then we would have prevented A from being isomorphic to (ω,<).
However, this would require moving 0 in and out of C inﬁnitely many times, which
would make C not ∆0
2. We must be more clever.


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
66
Let p0 = 0. We will wait for computations as above (with uses u0 and v0), and
then choose p1 > v. We wait for computations
Cs[0,... ,p1] = 0 = ΦRA
s
i,s [0,... ,p1]
with use u1 and
RA
s [0,... ,u1] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,u1]
with use v1. We will move p0 = 0 into and then out of C as above to enumerate
an element in A below one of [0,... ,u]. At the same time, we will create a “link”
between [0,... ,u0] and [u0 + 1,... ,u1] so that if some element gets enumerated
below one of [u0 + 1,... ,u1], then some element will also get enumerated below
one of [0,... ,u0]. (Exactly how these links work will be explained later.) We have
moved p0 into and then out of C, but from now on it will stay out of C. We will
ﬁnd a p2, and move p1 into and out of C. On the one hand, this will cause an
element to be enumerated below one of [u0 + 1,... ,u1], and hence below one of
[0,... ,u0]. On the other hand, we will create a “link” between [u0 + 1,... ,u1] and
[u1+1,... ,u2]. Now when an element gets enumerated below one of [u1+1,... ,u2],
an element gets enumerated below one of [u0 + 1,... ,u1], and thus some element
gets enumerated below one of [0,... ,u0]. Continuing in this way, deﬁning p3, p4,
and so on, and maintaining these links, we force inﬁnitely many elements to be
enumerated below some element of [0,... ,u0]. We will describe exactly how these
links work in the construction. Figure 4.3 shows the computations which we use
during the construction.
The construction will consist of three steps deﬁned below, which are repeated
for each of n = 0,1,.... The proof of the following lemma will be interspersed with
the construction below:
Lemma 4.23. If A is an isomorphic copy of (ω,<), and
C = ΦRA
i
and RA = ΦC
j
then the construction does not get stuck in any step.
After describing the action taking place at each step, we will prove that if A is
an isomorphic copy of (ω,<), and
C = ΦRA
i
and RA = ΦC
j
then the construction eventually ﬁnishes that step.
Begin the construction with p0 = 0 and C0 = ∅. Before beginning to repeat the
three steps, wait for a stage s where we have computations
Cs[p0] = 0 = ΦRA
s
i,s [p0]
(4.1)
with use u0 and
RA
s [0,... ,u0] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,u0]
(4.2)


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
67
with use v0. Let s0 = s. If C = ΦRA
i
and RA = ΦC
j , we eventually ﬁnd computations
as in (4.1) and (4.2).
Now repeat, in order, the following steps. We call each repetition of these steps
a Rep. Begin at Rep 0 with n = 0. At the beginning of Rep n, we will have deﬁned
values pi, si, ui, and vi for 0 ≤i ≤n, mi, wi, and qi for 0 ≤i < n, and ρi and νi for
1 ≤i ≤n (note that we never deﬁne ρ0 or ν0). At the beginning of each repetition,
we will have C = ∅; in Step One, we will add an element to C, and in Step Two we
will remove that element from C returning it to the way it was before.
Step One. Wait for a stage s and an m > ρn such that
(1) at this stage s we still have the computation
RA
s [0,... ,ρn] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,ρn]
(4.3)
with use νn from Step 3 of the previous step (see equation (4.12)). If n = 0,
then instead we ask that
RA
s [0,... ,u0] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,u0],
(4.4)
(2) all of the elements x of As with x ⪯A pn come from among [0,... ,m],
(3) there is a computation
RA
s [0,... ,m] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,m]
(4.5)
with use w,
(4) there are computations
Cs[0,... ,w + 1] = ΦRA
s
i,s [0,... ,w + 1]
(4.6)
with use u and
RA
s [0,... ,u] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,u]
(4.7)
with use v,
(5) for each z ∈[0,... ,un], among the elements [0,... ,m] of As there is a match-
ing pair of k-cycles (for some k ∈ω) ¯x = (x0,... ,xk) and ¯y = (y0,... ,yk) in As
with x0 ⪯A z ⪯A yk and there are edges from each element of [m + 1,... ,u] to
yk (and an edge from x0 to y0 witnessing that the k-cycles form a matching
pair).
Set mn = m, wn = w, pn+1 = w+1, un+1 = u, vn+1 = v, and sn+1 = s. Set Cs+1(pn) = 1
to break the computation .
The idea at this step is to ﬁnd, for each z ∈[0,... ,un], a matching pair of k-
cycles ¯x and ¯y which contain z between them. These k-cycles are all contained in
the elements [0,... ,m]. Moreover, ¯x and ¯y look like they correspond to the k-cycles
(ak,... ,ak + k) and (ck,... ,ck + k) respectively from the standard copy of (ω,<) in


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
68
the sense that there is an edge from each element of [mn + 1,... ,un+1] to yk. We
also deﬁne the next value pn+1 during this step. All of this is to set up the “link”
between pn+1 to pn (but the link will not be completed until Step Three).
Note that, since we set pn+1 = w + 1, un+1 = u, and sn+1 = s, the computation
(4.6) is really
Csn+1[0,... ,pn+1] = Φ
RA
sn+1
i,sn+1 [0,... ,pn+1]
(4.8)
with use un+1. At the end of this step, we set Cs+1(pn) = 1 to break the computation
Cs[0,... ,pn] = ΦRA
s
i,s [0,... ,pn]
with use un from (4.8) of Rep n −1.
Proof of Lemma 4.23 for Step One. Suppose that we never leave Step One. Let t
be the stage at which we entered Step One. Then C = Ct. For suﬃciently large
s > t, we have the true computation
RA
s [0,... ,ρn] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,ρn]
as in (4.3). Thus we satisfy (1). Recall that N is the isomorphism A →(ω,<).
Since A is an isomorphic copy of (ω,<), there are only ﬁnitely many elements x ∈A
with x ⪯A an and so for suﬃciently large m, they all come from [0,... ,m]. So (2) is
satisﬁed as well. For each z ∈[0,... ,un], there is k such that N(z) is in the interval
[ak,ak+1). Let ¯x and ¯y be the matching pair of k-cycles in A which are the pre-
images, under the isomorphism N, of (ak,... ,ak +k) and (ck,... ,ck +k). Increasing
m if necessary, we may assume that these k-cycles are contained in [0,... ,m] in A,
and that all of the elements of A which are ⪯A-less than any entry of ¯x and ¯y are
contained in [0,... ,m]. Do this for each z.
Since RA = ΦC
j , for suﬃciently large s we have true computations as in (4.5),
(4.6), and (4.7) deﬁning w, u, and v. So (3) and (4) are satisﬁed.
Finally, for each z ∈[0,... ,un] the k-cycles ¯x and ¯y chosen above satisfy x0 ⪯A
z ⪯A yk and there is an edge from x0 to y0. Since all of the elements of A which are
⪯A-less than any entry of ¯x and ¯y are contained in [0,... ,m], each of m + 1,... ,u
are ⪯A-greater than yk. So there is an edge from each of these to yk. Thus (5) is
satisﬁed. This contradicts our assumption that we never leave Step One.
Step Two. Wait for a stage s such that
RA
s [mn−1 + 1,... ,un] ≠RA
sn[mn−1 + 1,... ,un] = RA
sn+1[mn−1 + 1,... ,un].
(4.9)
Let qn be the ⪯A-greatest element in [mn−1+1,... ,un]; note that Ns(qn) > Nsn+1(qn).
Set Cs+1(pn) = 0.
In the previous step, we broke the computation
Csn[0,... ,pn] = Φ
RA
sn
i,sn [0,... ,pn].


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
69
In order for this computation to again hold at some s, RA must change below the
use un of that computation. That means that some element must be enumerated
in A ⪯A-below one of 0,... ,un (in fact, it will have to be enumerated below one
of mn−1 + 1,... ,un). We let q be the ⪯A-greatest such element, so we know that
some an element has been enumerated below qn. At the end of this stage, we set
Cs+1(pn) = 0 (so that Cs+1 = Csn) to restore the computation above and force RA
to return to the way it was before.
Proof of Lemma 4.23 for Step Two. Suppose that the construction does not leave
Step Two. Then for all t > sn+1, Ct(an) = Csn+1+1(an) ≠Csn+1(an) = Csn(an). Since
C = ΦRA
i
, at some stage t > sn+1, we have a true computation
Ct[0,... ,an] = ΦRA
t
i
.
By (4.8) of the previous repetition, and since Ct(an) ≠Csn(an), we have
RA
s [0,... ,un] ≠RA
sn[0,... ,un].
(4.10)
Since Ct[0,... ,wn−1] = Csn[0,... ,wn−1], by (4.5) we have
RA
s [0,... ,mn−1] = RA
sn[0,... ,mn−1].
Thus
RA
s [mn−1 + 1,... ,un] ≠RA
sn[mn−1 + 1,... ,un].
This contradicts our assumption that we never leave Step Two.
Step Three. Wait for a stage s and ρ > un+1 such that
(1) we have
RA
s [0,... ,un+1] = RA
sn+1[0,... ,un+1],
(4.11)
(2) among the elements [0,... ,ρ] of As, there is a matching pair of ℓ-cycles (for
some ℓ) ¯σ = (σ0,... ,σk) and ¯τ = (τ0,... ,τk) in As with σk ≺As qn and z ≺As τ0
for each z ∈[mn + 1,... ,un+1] (and an edge from σ0 to τ0 but not vice versa
witnessing that the ℓ-cycles are matching),
(3) we have the computation
RA
s [0,... ,ρ] = ΦCs
j,s[0,... ,ρ]
(4.12)
with use ν.
Set ρn+1 = ρ and νn+1 = ν. Return to Step One for Rep n + 1.
In this step, we wait for the computation (4.11) to be restored. Now, this forces
RA to be the same as it was during Step One:
RA
s [0,... ,un+1] = RA
sn[0,... ,un+1].


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
70
At Step One, there was a matching pair of k-cycles ¯x and ¯y which contained qn
between them. Since RA is the same at this stage as it was at that stage, ¯x and ¯y
are still a matching pair of k-cycles. But some element has been enumerated below
qn since then, and by Remark 4.22, it must be enumerated below ¯x. So ¯x and ¯y are
not the ⪯A-least matching pair of k-cycles. Thus, they correspond to some elements
in an interval [bℓ,cℓ) from (ω,<) for some ℓ. The ¯σ and ¯τ in (2) above are supposed
to correspond to (aℓ,... ,aℓ+ ℓ) and (cℓ,... ,cℓ+ ℓ) from (ω,<) respectively. Since,
in Step One, there was an edge from each z ∈[mn + 1,... ,un+1] to yk, each such z
must also correspond to some element from the interval [bℓ,cℓ) (one can see from
the deﬁnition of the relation R that there are no such edges from an element z ≥cℓ
to some y ∈[bℓ,cℓ)).
This establishes the desired “link”. By Remark 4.22, since the interval [σ0,τℓ]
is of a ﬁxed length determined by ℓ, no new elements can be enumerated between
σ0 and τℓ. So if some new element is enumerated below one of [mn + 1,... ,un+1],
it must be enumerated below σ0 and hence below qn.
Proof of Lemma 4.23 for Step Three. Suppose that the construction never leaves
Step Three. Suppose that the construction entered Step Three at stage s. For t ≥s,
we have Ct = Csn+1 = ∅. Since RA = ΦC
j , and using (4.7), for suﬃciently large t > s
we have
RA[0,... ,un+1] = RA
t [0,... ,un+1] = RA
sn+1[0,... ,un+1].
(4.13)
Since qn ∈[mn−1 + 1,... ,un], at stage sn+1, there was a matching pair of k-cycles
¯x = (x0,... ,xk) and ¯y = (y0,... ,yk) among the elements [0,... ,mn] as in (5) of
Step One with x0 ⪯A qn ⪯A yk. Since
RA[0,... ,un+1] = RA
sn+1[0,... ,un+1],
¯x and ¯y are actually k-cycles in A, and is actually an edge from x0 to y0. Also,
Nt(qn) > Nsn+1(qn).
By Remark 4.22, Nt(x0) > Nsn+1(x0).
Let ¯x′ ∈(ω,<) be
(Nsn+1(x0),... ,Nsn+1(xk)) and similarly for ¯y′. Let ¯x′′ ∈(ω,<) be (Nt(x0),... ,Nt(xk))
and similarly for ¯y′′. Then in (ω,<) we know that ¯x′ and ¯y′ are a matching pair
of k-cycles, and so are ¯x′′ and ¯y′′. So ¯x′′ and ¯y′′ are not the ﬁrst matching pair of
k-cycles, and so they are contained in some interval [bℓ,cℓ) for some ℓ. Moreover,
in RA, each element z of [mn,... ,un+1] has an edge from it to x0. This is only
possible if Nt(z) ∈[bℓ,cℓ) for each such z. Let ¯σ and ¯τ be the matching pair of
ℓ-cycles in A whose images in (ω,<) under the isomorphism N are (aℓ,... ,aℓ+ ℓ)
and (cℓ,... ,cℓ+ ℓ) respectively. Then ¯σ and ¯τ the required ℓ-cycles in Step 3. We
get the computation for (4.12) because RA = ΦC
j . This contradicts our assumption
that we never leave Step Three.
This ends the construction. In the process, we have proved Lemma 4.23. The
next two lemmas complete the proof that the construction works as desired.
Lemma 4.24. C is a d.c.e. set and the approximation Cs is a d.c.e. approximation


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
71
Proof. We change the approximation Cs(x) at most twice for each x—since x = pn
for at most one n, we change Cs(x) at most once in Step One and once in Step
Two.
Lemma 4.25. If the construction does not get stuck in any stage, then A is not
isomorphic to (ω,<).
Proof. In the construction above we remarked that Nsn+2(qn) > Nsn+1(qn).
We
claim that for all n ≥1, Nsn+1(q0) > Nsn(q0).
This would imply that A is not
isomorphic to (ω,<), as qn ∈A would have inﬁnitely many predecessors.
The key to the proof will be to use the “links” that we created during the
construction. We will show that if, for n′ > n + 1, Nsn′+1(qn+1) > Nsn′(qn+1) then
Nsn′+1(qn) > Nsn′(qn). This will suﬃce to prove the lemma.
During Step Three of the nth repetition, we saw that among the elements
[0,... ,ρn+1], there is a matching pair of ℓ-cycles ¯σ = (σ0,... ,σℓ) and ¯τ = (τ0,... ,τℓ)
in As with σℓ≺A qn and z ≺A τ0 for each z ∈[m + 1,... ,v]. Moreover, by (4.3), at
every stage sn′ for n′ > n + 1, ¯σ and ¯τ are ℓ-cycles in Asn′ .
Then qn+1 ∈[m+1,... ,v], so qn+1 ≺A τ0. Thus if Nsn′+1(qn+1) > Nsn′(qn+1), then
Nsn′+1(τ0) > Nsn′(τ0). Since ¯σ and ¯τ are a matching pair of ℓ-cycles at stages sn′ and
sn′+1, by Remark 4.22 no new elements are added between ¯σ and ¯τ in between these
stages. So Nsn′+1(σ0) > Nsn′(σ0), and since σ0 ⪯A qn, Nsn′+1(qn) > Nsn′(qn).
If A is an isomorphic copy of (ω,<), then Lemma 4.23 and Lemma 4.25 combine
to show that
C ≠ΦRA
i
or RA ≠ΦC
j .
This completes the proof of Theorem 4.19.
One can view the proof as a strategy for satisfying a single requirement Re,i,j.
For a ﬁxed e0, it does not add too much diﬃculty to satisfy multiple requirements
of the form Re0,i,j at the same time—since these requirement are all working with
the same structure Ae, only one requirement has to force Ae to not be isomorphic
to (ω,<). However, if one tries to satisfy every requirement Re,i,j for diﬀerent e’s at
the same time, one runs into a problem. Each requirement tries to restrain inﬁnitely
much of ω, and in order to build pn+1, the requirement must move pn. Thus if pn+1
is injured, pn may injure other requirements.


CHAPTER 4. RELATIONS ON THE NATURALS
72
pn
C
RA
un
mn
wn
...
...
...
Φi
vn
...
...
pn+1
wn+1
vn+1
...
...
un+1
mn+1
...
...
...
...
Φj
ρn
νn
...
...
...
ρn+1
...
νn+1
Figure 4.3: The values associated to a requirement for Proposition 4.19. An arrow
shows a computation converging. The computations use an oracle and compute
some initial segment of their target. The tail of the arrow shows the use of the
computation, and the head shows the length.


Chapter 5
A “Fullness” Theorem for
2-CEA Degrees
In this section, we will prove Theorem 1.5. Recall that a set A is 2-CEA in a set B
if there is C such that A is c.e. in and above C and C is c.e. in and above B.
We will prove the theorem in the following form:
Theorem 5.1. Let C be a computable structure, and let R be an additional com-
putable relation on C. Suppose that R is not formally ∆0
2(0′′′). Then for all degrees
d ≥0(ω+1) and sets A 2-CEA in d there is an isomorphic copy D of C with D ≡T d
and
RD ⊕D ≡T A.
Our construction will actually build D ≤T d. We can use Knight’s theorem on
the upwards closure of the degree spectrum of a structure (see [Kni86]) to obtain
D ≡T d as follows. Suppose that we have built D ≤T d as in the theorem. There
is an isomorphic copy D∗≡T d of D.
Moreover, D∗is obtained by applying a
permutation f ≡T d to D. Then f ⊕D ≡T f ⊕D∗≡T D∗and f ⊕RD ≡T f ⊕RD∗.
Hence
A ≡T D∗⊕RD∗.
Theorem 1.5 is obtained from Theorem 5.1 by relativizing the proof.
Given
any structure C and relation R on C, we can build a computable copy D ≡T d
as in Theorem 5.1 for any d in the cone above (C ⊕R)ω+1. We could also give
eﬀectiveness conditions on computable C and R which would suﬃce to take d = 0,
but these would be quite complicated.
Finally, the simplest way to state the theorem is as follows:
Corollary 5.2. Let C be a structure and R a relation on C. Then either
dgSprel(C,R) ⊆∆0
2
or
2-CEA ⊆dgSprel(C,R).
73


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
74
The proof of the theorem will use free elements as in Barker’s proof that formally
Σα is the same as intrinsically Σα [Bar88]. It will probably be helpful to understand
the proof of that result at least for the case α = 2.
Deﬁnition 5.3. We say that ¯a ∉R is 2-free over ¯c if for all ¯a1, there are ¯a′ ∈R and
¯a′
1 such that
¯c, ¯a, ¯a1 ≤1 ¯c, ¯a′, ¯a1.
Recall that ≤0 and ≤1 are the ﬁrst two back-and-forth relations; ¯a ≤0 ¯b if all of the
quantiﬁer-free formulas with G¨odel number less than ∣¯a∣which are true of ¯a are
true of ¯b, while ¯a ≤1 ¯b if every Σ0
1 formula true of ¯b is true of ¯a (see Chapter 15 of
[AK00]). If F ∶{0,...,m} →C and G ∶{0,...,n} →C are functions with n > m,
then F ≤i G means that
F(0),...,F(m) ≤i G(0),... ,G(m).
If R is not formally ∆0
2(0′′′), then either R is not deﬁned by a 0′′′-computable
Π0
2 formula or ¬R is not deﬁned by a 0′′′-computable Π0
2 formula. We may suppose
without loss of generality that it is R which is not deﬁned by a 0′′′-computable Π0
2
formula. We will relativize Proposition 16.1 of [AK00] to show that for any tuple ¯c,
there is a tuple ¯a which is 2-free over ¯c. Moreover, using 0(4) we can check whether
a tuple is 2-free, and hence ﬁnd these 2-free tuples.
Proposition 5.4. Let C be a computable structure, and let R be a further com-
putable relation on C. Suppose that ¯c is a tuple over which no ¯a ∉R is 2-free. Then
there is a 0′′′-computable Σ2 formula ϕ(¯c, ¯x) deﬁning ¬R.
Proof. We have ¯x ≤1 ¯y exactly when all ∃1 formulas true of ¯y are true of ¯x; so ¯x ≤1 ¯y
if and only if
⩕
ϕ a ∃1 formula
[ϕ(¯y) ⇒ϕ(¯x)].
This is a computable Π2 formula. In particular, C is 2-friendly relative to 0′′. By
Theorem 15.2 of Ash-Knight, for each ¯a ∉R and ¯a1 there is (uniformly in ¯a and ¯a1)
a 0′′-computable Π1 formula ϕ¯c,¯a,¯a1(¯c, ¯x, ¯u) which says that ¯c, ¯a, ¯a1 ≤1 ¯c, ¯x, ¯u.
Since there are no tuples in ¬R which are 2-free over ¯c, for each ¯a ∉R there is
¯a1 such that for every ¯a′ ∈R and ¯a′
1, ¯c, ¯a, ¯a1 ≰1 ¯c, ¯a′, ¯a′
1. Since ≤1 is computable in
0′′, we can ﬁnd such a ¯a1 for each ¯a ∈∉R using 0′′′. For each ¯a, using this ¯a1, deﬁne
ψ¯a(¯c, ¯x) = (∃¯u)ϕ¯c,¯a,¯a1(¯c, ¯x, ¯u).
This formula is true of ¯a, but it is not true of any element of R. Thus ¬R is deﬁned
by
⩔
¯a∈R
ψ¯a(¯c, ¯x).
This is a 0′′′-computable Σ2 formula.
The proof of Theorem 5.1 is quite complicated and will take the rest of this
chapter.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
75
5.1
Approximating a 2-CEA Set
Let B be c.e. and let A be c.e. in and above B. As A is Σ0
2, there is a computable
approximation f(x,s) for A such that x ∈A if and only if f(x,s) = 0 for suﬃciently
large s, and x ∉A if and only if f(x,s) = 1 for inﬁnitely many s. However, if A is an
arbitrary Σ0
2 set, and x ∈A, then A cannot necessarily compute a stage s after which
f(x,t) = 0. We will begin by showing that A in fact has such an approximation by
virtue of computing B. Everything in this section relativizes.
Lemma 5.5. Let B be c.e. and let A be c.e. in and above B. There is a computable
approximation f ∶ω2 →{0,1} such that x ∈A if and only if f(x,s) = 0 for suﬃciently
large s, and x ∉A if and only if f(x,s) = 1 for inﬁnitely many s. Moreover, B (and
hence A) can compute uniformly whether for all t ≥s, f(x,t) = 0.
Proof. As B is c.e., it has a computable approximation Bs. Let e be such that
A = W B
e . Set f(x,0) = 0. Suppose that we have deﬁned f(x,s). If x ∉W Bs
e
, then
let f(x,s + 1) = 1. If x ∈W Bs
e
, and f(x,s) = 1, set f(x,s + 1) = 0. If x ∈W Bs
e
and f(x,s) = 0, then x ∈W Bs−1
e
with some use u. We set f(x,s + 1) = 0 if the
computations x ∈W Bs
e
and x ∈W Bs−1
e
are the same (that is, if Bs and Bs−1 agree
up to the use u). Otherwise, set f(x,s + 1) = 1.
If x ∈W B
e , there is some computation with ﬁnite use that witnesses this, and
hence f(x,s) = 0 for suﬃciently large s. If x ∉W B
e , then there is no such compu-
tation; so either there are inﬁnitely many stages s at which x ∉W Bs
e
, or there are
inﬁnitely many pairs of stages s and s+1 such that x ∈W Bs
e
and x ∈W Bs−1
e
, but the
computations are diﬀerent, and hence f(x,s + 1) = 1. So there are inﬁnitely many
stages s at which f(x,s) = 1 and f is a Σ0
2 approximation for A.
Finally, suppose s is a stage at which f(x,s) = 0; we wish to know whether, for
all t > s, f(x,t) = 0. There is some computation x ∈W Bs−1
e
with use u witnessing
that f(x,s) = 0. Using B, we can decide whether Bs−1 correctly approximates B
up to u. If so, f(x,t) = 0 for all t > s. Otherwise, there is some ﬁrst stage t > s at
which Bt−1 is diﬀerent from Bs−1 below the use u; either x ∉W Bt−1
e
, or x ∈W Bt−1
e
but the computation is diﬀerent from that which witnesses x ∈W Bs−1
e
. In either
case, f(x,t) = 1.
We want to put an approximation like the one in the previous lemma on a
tree so that the true path is the leftmost path visited inﬁnitely often, while still
maintaining the ability of A to compute stages at which it stabilizes. We will also
keep track of how many separate times a particular node in 2<ω is visited. Let ω+
be {∞} ∪ω (with ∞viewed as being to the left of each element of ω). Let T be
the tree (ω+)<ω. If σ ∈T , we write v(σ) for the string in 2<ω of the same length
as σ which replaces each ∞in σ with 0, and each other entry with 1. For f ∈[T ],
v(f) is deﬁned similarly. We denote by T∞the set of nodes which end in ∞, and
by Tω the set of nodes which end in an element of ω. For σ ∈T , we denote by σ−
the proper initial segment of σ of length one less. We denote by ℓ(σ) the last entry
of σ.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
76
Lemma 5.6. Let B be c.e. and A be c.e. in and above B. There is a computable
approximation (σs)s∈ω ∈T ω such that there is a unique g ∈[T ] with ρ ⊂g if and only
if ρ ⊂σs for inﬁnitely many s. From A we can compute g, and v(g) = A. Moreover,
(i) for each τ ∈T of length n, if s0,s1,... are the stages s at which τ ⊂σs, then
σs0 = τ and the sequence a0 = σs1(n),a1 = σs2(n),... has the property that
a0 = ∞and if ai ∈ω, then ai counts the number of j < i −1 such that aj = ∞
and aj+1 ∈ω, and
(ii) if s < t are such that σs and σt are compatible, then σt is a strict extension
of σs, and if σs is the largest initial segment of σt which has appeared before
stage t, then σt extends σs by a single element.
It is a consequence of (i) that if we visit some node σ, and then move further
left in the tree than σ, we will never again return to σ. We may however return to
a node further to the right of σ. For example, if f(0) = 0, f(1) = 1, f(2) = 0, and
f(3) = 1 then we might have σ0 = ∞, σ1 = 0, σ2 = ∞∞, and σ3 = 1. Since σ2 is to
the left of σ1, we can no longer visit σ1; instead, we visit σ3 which is further to the
right.
Proof. Let f be the approximation from the previous lemma. We may assume that
f(x,0) = 0 for all x. We will construct the approximation (σs)s∈ω in stages. We
will actually build a sequence of pairs (σs,τs) with τs ∈ω<ω. For each s, τs will be
the same length as σs, and τs(n) will point to a stage of the approximation f to
which σs(n) corresponds in the sense that σs(n) = f(n,τs(n)). Begin with σ0 = ∞
and τ0 = 0.
Suppose that we have deﬁned (σs,τs) for s = 0,1,... ,n.
Now we will de-
ﬁne (σn+1,τn+1), beginning with σn+1(0) and τn+1(0) and then proceeding re-
cursively.
Let t0 = n + 1 and a0 = f(0,n + 1).
Suppose that we have deﬁned
t0,... ,tℓand a0,... ,aℓ.
Let mℓ+1 be the most recent stage at which the string
σmℓ+1(0),... ,σmℓ+1(ℓ) agrees with the string f(0,t0),f(1,t1),... ,f(ℓ,tℓ) in the
sense that
v(σmℓ+1 ↾ℓ+1) = f(0,t0),f(1,t1),... ,f(ℓ,tℓ).
Let tℓ+1 = τmℓ+1(ℓ+ 1) + 1 (or 0 if ∣τmℓ+1∣≤ℓ+ 1). Let aℓ+1 = ∞if f(ℓ+ 1,tℓ+1) = 0.
If f(ℓ+ 1,tℓ+1) = 1, let s0,s1,... ,sr be the stages s ≤ℓat which (a0,... ,aℓ) ⊂σs;
let aℓ+1 ∈ω count the number of j < r such that σsj(ℓ+ 1) = ∞and σsj+1(ℓ+ 1) ∈ω.
Continue deﬁning the ti and ai until we reach some string a0,... ,aℓ+1 which has not
appeared before as a σs with s ≤n. Let σn+1 = a0,... ,aℓ+1 and τn+1 = t0,... ,tℓ+1.
This completes the construction.
We need to show that there is a unique g ∈[T ] with ρ ⊂g if and only if ρ ⊂σs
for inﬁnitely many s. We show this by induction on the length of ρ, building g as
we go. At the same time, we will see that v(g) = A. For ∣ρ∣= 1, we always have
σs(0) = f(0,s), so σs(0) = ∞for inﬁnitely many s if and only if f(0,s) = 0 for
inﬁnitely many s. On the other hand, if f(0,s) = 1 for suﬃciently large s, then for
suﬃciently large s, σs(0) = k for some particular k ∈ω.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
77
Now we consider the case ∣ρ∣= n+1, supposing that there is a unique ρ′ of length
n with ρ′ ⊂σs for inﬁnitely many s. Let s0,s1,... be the stages s at which ρ ⊆σs.
Now, from the construction, we see that σs0 = ρ, since the construction of σs0 stops
when σs0 is distinct from each σs for s < s0. In deﬁning σs1, s0 is the value for the
previous stage mn+1 in the construction; and t0 = τs1(n + 1) = 0. In deﬁning σs2, s1
is the previous stage, and so tn+1 = τs2(n + 1) = 1; and so on. So τsi+1(n + 1) = i.
Moreover, σsi+1(n + 1) = ∞if f(n + 1,i) = 0 and is in ω otherwise, and if f(0,s) = 1
for suﬃciently large s, then for suﬃciently large i, σsi(n+1) = k for some particular
k ∈ω.
Finally, (i) and (ii) can be seen directly from the construction: (i) from the choice
of k and (ii) from the fact that the ti and ai are constructed until a0,... ,aℓ+1 = σn+1
is distinct from σ0,... ,σn; thus σn+1 is an extension by a single element of the
longest previous string it is compatible with.
The lemma relativizes as follows.
Corollary 5.7. Let A be 2-CEA relative to d. There is a d-computable approxima-
tion (σs)s∈ω ∈T ω and a unique g ∈[T ] as in the lemma with A ≥T g and v(g) = A.
5.2
Basic Framework of the Construction
In this section, we will describe what we are building during the construction and
nine properties that we will maintain at each stage. We will also show how this
will allow us to compute the relation from the structure and vice versa. Let C, d,
R, and A be as in Theorem 5.1: C is a computable structure, R is an additional
computable relation on C, d is a degree above 0(ω+1), and A is 2-CEA in d. For
simplicity, assume that R is unary.
We will build a model D ≤d with domain ω. The construction will be by stages,
at each of which we deﬁne increasing ﬁnite portions Ds of the diagram. At each
stage we will deﬁne a ﬁnite partial isomorphism Fs. This partial isomorphism will
map {0,...,n} into C for some n. These partial isomorphisms will not necessarily
extend each other; however, they will all be consistent with the partial diagram Ds
we are building. Moreover, there will be a bijective limit F ∶ω →C along the true
stages of the construction. Then D will be given by the pullback, along F, of the
diagram of C. D will be computable because its diagram will be ⋃Ds. To simplify
the notation, denote by Fs(a1,... ,aℓ) the tuple Fs(a1),... ,Fs(aℓ).
Here is the basic idea. To code that some element x is not in A, we will put
an element a ∉R which is 2-free into the image of F (there may already be some
elements in the range of F; a should be free over them as well). At following stages,
we may add more elements ¯a1 into the image of F. If, at some later stage, we think
that x ∈A then we will replace a, ¯a1 with a′, ¯a′
1 where a′ ∈R and so that every
existential formula true of a′, ¯a′
1 is true of a, ¯a1. Then it is possible that at some
later stage we again think that x ∉A. We can replace a′, ¯a′
1 with a, ¯a1, returning
to the previous stage in the construction at which we thought that x ∉A. We have
probably added some more elements to the image of F while we thought that x ∈A,


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
78
but the fact that a, ¯a1 ≤1 a′, ¯a′
1 means that we can ﬁnd corresponding witnesses over
a, ¯a1. Using RD, we can ﬁgure out what happened during the construction, and
hence whether or not x ∈A. Now we know how to code a single fact.
Now we will describe how to code two elements x < y. To code the fact that
x ∉A, add to the range of F an element a ∉R which is 2-free. To code that y ∉A,
add to the range of F another element b ∉R which is 2-free over a. Now if at
some later stage, we think that y ∈A, we can act as above. But if we think that
x ∈A, then we replace a,b with some a′,b′ with a′ ∈R and ab ≤1 a′b′. Now b′ is not
necessarily 2-free; so to code that y ∉A while we think that x ∈A, we need to add a
new element c which is 2-free over a′b′. At some later stage, we might think again
that x ∉A, so we need to return to ab; we can do this because ab ≤1 a′b′ (and c is
replaced by some c′ which is not necessarily 2-free over ab, but that does not matter
because now b is doing the coding again). So far, this is essentially describing the
argument for Theorem 2.1 of [AK97]. This succeeds in coding A into RD, but we
require d′ in order to decode it. The problem is the following situation. Suppose
that we have done the construction as described above, coding whether x or y is
in A, and we currently think that neither is. Our function F looks like abc′ so far.
But then at some later stage we might think for a second time that x ∈A. We
replace abc′ by a′′b′′c′′, with a′′ ∈R and abc′ ≤1 a′′b′′c′′. Now c′′ may not be 2-free
over a′′b′′, so we need to add a new element d which is 2-free over a′′b′′c′′, and use
d to code whether y ∈A. Using just RD and d, we cannot distinguish between
the case a′b′c where y is being coded by the third element, or a′′b′′c′′d where it is
being coded by the fourth element (a′ and a′′ are both in R, and we cannot control
whether or not b′, b′′, or c′′ are in R). We can diﬀerentiate between the two cases
using d′, which is the basis of the proof by Ash and Knight.
What we do to solve this is the ﬁrst time we think that x ∈A, after choosing a′
and b′, we add a new element a0 before adding c which is 2-free over a′b′a0. When
we later believe that x ∉A again, we return to aba′
0c′ for some a′
0; and then later
when we believe that x ∈A once more, we choose a′′
0 as well as a′′, b′′, and c′′. The
trick will be to ensure that a0 ∈R if and only if a′′
0 ∉R. Thus R can diﬀerentiate
between the two cases. The argument as to why we can choose an appropriate a0 is
complicated, and is the main diﬃculty in this proof. The element a0 will actually
need to be a ﬁnite list of elements. For now, we do not need to worry about how
we choose a0—this will be done in the following sections.
In the previous section we had a computable approximation for A which kept
track of how many times we switched between believing an element was in A and not
in A. We will assigns labels from the tree T to positions in the partial isomorphism
to say what those positions are coding. In the situation above, we will assign to the
position in which a is the label ∞; it codes whether ∞(i.e. x ∉A) is the correct
approximation to A. The position of b would code ∞∞since it codes, if the correct
approximation for whether or not x ∈A is ∞(or x ∉A), that y ∉A. The position of
a0 codes 0, since it represents the ﬁrst time that we think that x ∈A. The position
of c codes 0∞since, if 0 is the correct approximation for x, it tries to code y ∉A.
When we add in d after a′′b′′c′′a′′
0, we will actually ﬁrst add another element a1 in
case at a further stage, we think that x ∉A, and then later think that x ∈A for a


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
79
third time; a1 will code 1, and d will code 1∞.
To keep track of these labels, we will deﬁne a partial injection Ls ∶T →dom(Fs).
While Ls is dependent on the stage s, once we set Ls(σ) at some stage s, we will
never change the image of σ. So if s < t, we will have Ls ⊆Lt. At each stage, we
will increase the domain of Ls by a ﬁnite amount, and so the domain of each Ls
will be ﬁnite. In fact, the domain of Ls will be {σi ∶0 ≤i ≤s}. Because of this,
Ls will satisfy two closure properties on its domain. First, if Ls is deﬁned at some
string, the it is deﬁned at every initial segment; and second, if Ls is deﬁned at some
string σˆb ending in b, and a < b in ω+, then Ls is deﬁned at σˆa. Each σ ∈Tω will
label not just Ls(σ), but a whole tuple Ls(σ),... ,Ls(σ)+k −1 where k = ks(σ) > 0
is a value deﬁned at stage s. For each σ ∈dom(Ls) ∩Tω, we will also maintain a
valuation ms(σ) ∈{−1,1}k which represents a choice of R or ¬R for the k elements
labeled by σ. We will write ¯a ∈Rms(σ) if ai ∈R whenever ms(σ) = 1, and ai ∉R
otherwise. Like Ls, once we set ks(σ) or ms(σ), the value will be ﬁxed.
Let σs and f be as in Corollary 5.7 with (σs)s∈ω ≤d and A ≡T f. We will take
a moment to show how we will compute f from RD and d. Let L be the union of
all the Ls, and similarly for m and k. L contains each initial segment of f. These
are partial d-computable functions. We will build D in such a way that
(C1*) if σ ∈T∞and σ ⊂f then L(σ) ∉RD;
(C2*) if σ ∈T∞and σ ⊄f but σ−⊂f, then L(σ) ∈RD;
(C3*) if σ ∈Tω and σ ⊂f then (L(σ),... ,L(σ) + k(σ) −1)) ∈(RD)m(σ); and
(C4*) if σ ∈Tω and σ ⊄f but σ−⊂f then (L(σ),... ,L(σ) + k(σ) −1) ∉(RD)m(σ).
We will use RD to recursively compute longer and longer initial segments of f.
Suppose that we have computed τ ⊂f. First, check whether L(τˆ∞) ∈∉RD; if it
is, then by (C2*) we must have τˆ∞⊂f. Otherwise, by (C1*) there is some x ∈ω
such that τˆx ⊂f. For each of x = 0,1,..., let ax = L(τˆx) and check whether
(ax,ax +1,... ,ax +k(τˆx)) ∈(RD)m(τˆx); if so for some x, then by (C4*), τˆx ⊂f;
otherwise, continue searching. By (C3*), we will eventually ﬁnd the correct initial
segment of f. Thus we will have f ≤T RD ⊕L ≤T RD ⊕d.
Now we will describe some properties which the partial isomorphisms Fs will
have. We required above that dom(L) consisted of σ0,σ1,σ2,.... So at each stage
s, we must make sure that σs is assigned a coding location:
(CLoc) dom(Ls) contains σs.
We also need to make sure the four properties (C1*), (C2*), (C3*), and (C4*)
of G and RD are true by doing the correct coding during the construction. At each
stage s and for each σ ∈dom(Ls), we will ensure that:
(C1) if σ ∈T∞and σ ⊂σs then Fs(Ls(σ)) ∈∉R;
(C2) if σ ∈T∞and σ ⊄σs but σ−⊂αs, then Fs(Ls(σ)) ∈R;
(C3) if σ ∈Tω and σ ⊂σs then Fs(Ls(σ),... ,Ls(σ) + ks(σ) −1)) ∈Rms(σ); and


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
80
(C4) if σ ∈Tω and σ ⊄σs but σ−⊂σs then Fs(Ls(σ),... ,Ls(σ) + ks(σ) −1) ∉
Rms(σ).
The Fs will maintain the same atomic diagram, even if they do not agree on par-
ticular elements. If s < t then
(At) Fs ≤0 Ft.
However, if two stages s and t agree on some part of the approximation, then they
will also agree on how that part of the approximation is being coded. This will
ensure that we can construct a limit F by looking at the values of the Fs at stages
where the approximation is correct.
(Ext) If α ⊂σs and α ⊂σt, then for all x ≤L(α), Fs(x) = Ft(x); if σs ⊂σt, then in
fact Fs ⊂Ft.
We want the ﬁnal isomorphism F to be total. To do this, we need to ensure that
we continue to add new elements into its image.
(Surj) The ﬁrst ∣σs∣−1 elements of C appear in ran(Fs ↾Ls(σs)).
It may be helpful to remember what the labels stand for: (CLoc) for coding lo-
cation; (C1), (C2), (C3), and (C4) for coding 1, coding 2, coding 3, and coding
4 respectively; (At) for atomic agreement; (Ext) for extension; and (Surj) for
surjective.
There is one last condition which ensures that we can complete the construction
while still satisfying the above conditions. Before stating it in the next section, we
have already done enough to describe the A-computable isomorphism F ∶D →C and
see that A ≥T RD. Recall that f is the path approximated by the σs as in Corollary
1.3. Let s1,s2,... be the list of stages sn such that σsn ⊂f. Then σs1 ⊊σs2 ⊊⋯is a
proper chain and f = ⋃σsn. As before, let L = ⋃Ls and similarly for k and m. Now
L(αs1),L(αs2),... is a strictly increasing sequence in ω, and for each i < j, Fsi ⊆Fsj
by (Ext). Deﬁne F(n) = ⋃Fsi; this is a total function because the Fsi are deﬁned
on increasingly large initial segments of ω. By (Surj), F is onto as ∣σsi∣≥i and
so the ﬁrst i −1 elements of C appear in the range of Fsi below G(σsi), and hence
appear in the range of F. F is injective since each Fs is; and the pullback along
F gives an isomorphic structure D whose diagram is the union of the diagrams of
the Fs, and these diagrams agree with each other because of (At). So the atomic
diagram of D is computable in d. The sequence s0,s1,... can be computed by A
because A can compute f; and, knowing the sequence s0,s1,..., we can compute F.
Hence A can compute F and so A ≥T RD (recall that C and R were computable).
Also, (C1), (C2), (C3), and (C4) imply respectively (C1*), (C2*), (C3*), and
(C4*). Earlier we argued that as a consequence, f ≤T RD ⊕d. Hence A ≡T RD ⊕d
as required.
5.3
An Informal Description of the Construction
Recall the intuitive picture of how the coding is done in the previous section, but
now using some of the more precise notation just developed.
We will begin by


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
81
looking at coding a single element, but now choosing the element a0 which we had
to add when we were coding two or more elements. Things will start to get more
complicated than they were before, so Figure 5.1 shows the isomorphism Fs as it
changes. We began by choosing an element a ∉R which is 2-free. We labeled a
with ∞, coding that 0 ∉A. Now, at some stage, we might think that 0 ∈A, so we
replace a by a′ with a′ ∈R. At this point, we must choose some a0 to code 0. We
are now concerned with the issue, which we ignored before, of how to choose a0.
What properties does a0 need to have? If at some later stage after we have added ¯b
to the image of F, we think that it is actually the case that 0 ∉A, we replace a′a0¯b
by aa′
0¯b′. Then, if at some further later stage after we have added more elements
¯c to the image of F, we once more think that 0 ∈A, we replace aa′
0¯b′¯c by a′′a′′
0¯b′′¯c′
where
aa′
0¯b′¯c ≤1 a′′a′′
0¯b′′¯c′
and a′′ ∈R. We need to have a0 ∈R if and only if a′′
0 ∉R. So what we need to know
is that, no matter what elements ¯b are added to the image of F, we can choose
a′
0 so that no matter which elements ¯c are then added to the image of F, we can
choose a′′, a′′
0 and so on such that a0 ∈R if and only if a′′
0 ∉R. This is a sort of
game where each player gets two moves—we are choosing a′
0, a′′, a′′
0, etc. satisfying
the required properties while both we and our opponent together choose the tuples
¯b and ¯c. By this, we mean that we choose a tuple, and then the tuple ¯b (or ¯c) that
our opponent plays must extend the tuple which we chose. We can do this because
at any point, we can add any elements we want to the isomorphism. We want to
know that we have a winning move in this game.
Coding locations
σs
∞
0
1
Approximation
∞
[a]
0
⌞a′⌟
[a0]
0⋯
⌞a′⌟
[a0]
¯b
∞
[a]
a′
0
¯b′
∞⋯
[a]
a′
0
¯b′
¯c
1
⌞a′′⌟
⌞a′′
0⌟
¯b′′
¯c′
[a1]
Figure 5.1: The values of the isomorphism Fs when coding a single element of
A. The column σs shows the approximation at a particular stage, and the coding
location shows an indexing via L. An entry is surrounded by brackets “[
]” to
show that it is coding “yes” (i.e., if it is at coding location τ, then it is coding τ). If
an entry is “active” in the sense that it is of the form τˆx and τ is being coded as
“yes”, but τˆx is coding “no” then it is marked as “⌞
⌟.” Any other entries which
are not active are unmarked.
Now let y ∉R be 2-free over a′. So there is x ∈R with a′x ≤1 a′y. Now we can
try choosing a0 = y. If this works (in the sense that for a0 = y, no matter which
¯b and then ¯c our opponent chooses we can choose a′
0 and a′′
0 as required), then we


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
82
can just choose a0 = y and we are done. If this choice does not work, then I want
to argue that choosing a0 = x does work. If y does not work, that means that for
some ¯b which our opponent plays, every a′
0 we choose puts us in a losing position.
This means that there is some existential formula ϕ(u,v) (which is witnessed by
the elements ¯b) so that y satisﬁes ϕ(a′,v) but that every a′
0 which works satisﬁes
ϕ(a,v) puts us in a losing position. This means that for every such a′
0 there is a
tuple ¯c which our opponent can play so that any a′′, a′′
0, etc. we choose with
aa′
0¯b′¯c ≤1 a′′a′′
0¯b′′¯c′
has a′′
0 ∈R since y was also in R. Now if we instead started with a0 = x, then that
same existential formula ϕ(u,v) which was true of a′,y is also true of a′,x since
a′,x ≤1 a′y. We can add to the isomorphism a tuple witnessing that ϕ(u,v) holds
of a′,x. So no matter which tuple ¯b our opponent actually plays, the existential
formula ϕ(a′,x)is witnessed by elements from ¯b. Then, since a ≤1 a′, there are
a′
0 = x′ and ¯b′ such that a′x¯b ≤0 ax′¯b′; thus ϕ(a,a0) holds. But then this a′
0 is one
which did not work for the choice a0 = y. Now we add to the isomorphism the tuple
which our opponent used to beat us at this point when we chose a0 = y and then
also chose this value of a′
0. So no matter which tuple ¯c our opponent actually plays,
it contains the tuple which they used to win when a0 was y. Thus, for every a′′,
a′′
0, etc. we choose with
aa′
0¯b′¯c ≤1 a′′a′′
0¯b′′¯c′
we have a′′
0 ∈R. This did not work for a0 = y, but since x ∉R, it does work for
a0 = x.
What we have done is taken our opponent’s strategy from the case a0 = y, and
forced them to use it when a0 = x. Their strategy consists only of choosing the tuples
¯c and ¯d, and these tuples are chosen by us together with our opponent (because we
can add them to the isomorphism before our opponent does). So when a0 = x we
can force our opponent to play tuples ¯c and ¯d which extend the tuples they played
when a0 = y. But because y ∈R and x ∉R, the winning conditions are diﬀerent for
the diﬀerent choices of a0, so what won our opponent the game for a0 = y now loses
him the game for a0 = x.
Choosing a0 can begin to get more complicated when we are coding two elements.
Figure 5.2 shows the isomorphism when coding two elements. For example, suppose
that we choose a and b, both not in R, with a 2-free and b 2-free over a. We label
a with ∞, coding 0 ∉A, and b with ∞∞, coding 1 ∉A. We think that 1 ∈A, and
replace b by some b′ with ab ≤1 ab′. Then we add a new element ¯b0 which is labeled
by ∞0. At some later stage, we think that 0 ∈A, and replace ab′¯b0 with a′b′′¯b′
0 with
ab′¯b0 ≤1 a′b′′¯b′
0. Now we need to add a tuple ¯a0 which is labeled by 0, followed by
an element c which is 2-free over a′b′′¯b′
0¯a0.
Now, as before, we need to see what properties we want to be true of ¯a0. The
tuple ¯a0 will have two entries. Suppose that we have added some tuple ¯d to the
isomorphism, and then we believe that 0 ∉A and 1 ∈A, so now we want to code
∞0. We make our isomorphism ab′¯b0¯a′
0c′ ¯d′ for some ¯a′
0, c′, and ¯d′, and then an
additional tuple ¯e gets added to the isomorphism. Now at some later stage, we


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
83
Coding locations
σs
∞
∞∞
∞0
0
0∞
1
∞
[a]
∞∞
[a]
[b]
∞0
[a]
⌞b′⌟
[¯b0]
0
⌞a′⌟
b′′
¯b′
0
[¯a0]
0∞
⌞a′⌟
b′′
¯b′
0
[¯a0]
[c]
¯d
∞0
[a]
⌞b′⌟
[¯b0]
¯a′
0
c′
¯d′
¯e
First case: opponent plays 1 immediately
1
⌞a′′⌟
b′′′
¯b′′
0
⌞¯a′′
0⌟
c′′
¯d′′
¯e′
[¯a1]
Second case: opponent plays ∞∞then 1
∞∞
[a]
[b]
¯b′′
0
¯a′′
0
c′′
¯d′′
¯e′
¯f
1
⌞a′′⌟
b′′′
¯b′′′
0
⌞¯a′′′
0 ⌟
c′′
¯d′′′
¯e′′
¯f ′
[¯a1]
Figure 5.2: The values of the isomorphism Fs when coding two elements of A. Two
possibilities are shown, depending on what the opponent in the game described
plays as the approximation—1, or ∞∞followed by 1.
believe that 0 ∈A once again, so we ﬁnd a′′ ∈R, b′′′, ¯b′′
0, ¯a′′
0, c′′, ¯d′′, and ¯e′ such that
ab′¯b0¯a′
0c′ ¯d′¯e ≤1 a′′b′′′¯b′′
0¯a′′′
0 c′′ ¯d′′¯e′.
In order to do our coding, for any ¯d, we must be able to choose our elements so
that for any ¯e, we can ﬁnd such a′′ ∈R, b′′′, etc. with the ﬁrst entry of ¯a′′
0 in R if
and only if the ﬁrst coordinate of ¯a is not in R.
On the other hand, the approximation might turn out to be diﬀerent. After
adding ¯d to the isomorphism, and again believing that 0 ∉A and 1 ∈A, and making
our isomorphism ab′¯b0¯a′
0c′ ¯d′, we add a new tuple ¯e to the isomorphism. In the
previous case, the approximation next told us that 0 ∈A once again; it might
instead be the case that ﬁrst, the approximation says that 0 ∉A and 1 ∉A. Then
we must change the isomorphism to ab¯b′′
0¯a′′
0 ¯c′′ ¯d′′¯e′. After we add some tuple ¯f to
the isomorphism, then we later believe that 0 ∈A, and so we must code 1. Now we
need to ﬁnd a′′ ∈R, b′′′, ¯b′′′
0 , ¯a′′′
0 , ¯c′′, ¯d′′′, ¯e′′, and ¯f ′ such that
ab¯b′′
0¯a′′
0c′′ ¯d′′¯e′f ≤1 a′′b′′′¯b′′′
0 ¯a′′′
0 ¯c′′ ¯d′′′¯e′′ ¯f ′.
To do our coding, we must have the second element of ¯a′′′
0 in R if and only if the
second element of a0 is not in R.
When we choose the tuple ¯a0, we do now know which case we will be in, and so
we must be able to handle both cases. There are actually more possibilities than
this (for example, we could think that 1 ∉A, then 1 ∈A, then 1 ∉A, then 1 ∈A, and
so on), but it will turn out that we get these possibilities for free, and so for now
we will just consider the two possibilities outlined above.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
84
Looking at this as a game again, in addition to adding tuples to the range of
the isomorphism, our opponent can now choose whether the ﬁrst possibility for the
approximation of A described above will happen, or whether the second possibility
will happen (he chooses the approximation stage by stage—so he chooses, at the
same time as choosing the tuple ¯e, which possibility we must respond to). We will
choose a pair ¯a0 = (a1
0,a2
0) to defeat our opponent: a1
0 to defeat our opponent when
he chooses to ﬁrst possibility for the approximation, and a2
0 for the second. We can
choose a1
0 exactly as before when we were only coding a single element, in order to
defeat our opponent if he uses the ﬁrst possibility; that is, if he chooses ¯d and ¯e,
and the approximation says that 0 ∉A, and then 0 ∈A (while saying that 1 ∈A the
whole time), we can choose a1′′
0
which is in R if and only if a1
0 is not. Now we have
to argue that we can choose a2
0 so that not only do we defeat our opponent if he
uses the second possibility for the approximation of A, but that we still beat our
opponent if he uses the ﬁrst possibility. Choose y ∉R which is 2-free over a′b′′¯b′
0a1
0,
and x ∈R such that a′b′′¯b′
0a1
0x ≤1 a′b′′¯b′
0a1
0y. Suppose that we cannot beat our
opponent if we choose a2
0 = y, so that he has some winning strategy for this game.
Call our opponent’s winning strategy for a2
0 = y their y-strategy.
Then we will choose a2
0 = x.
We will use our winning strategy for the ﬁrst
approximation to ensure that the only way in which we can lose is if our opponent
uses the second approximation (∞∞followed by 1) and forces us to have a2′′′
0
∈R
(recall that a2
0 = x ∈R). Now, other than choosing the approximation, the only plays
our opponent can make are to choose ¯d, ¯e, and ¯f. Now these tuples are played by us
together with our opponent, so we can force our opponent to use their y-strategy by
forcing them to play tuples extending those they used in the y-strategy (note that
if our opponent plays a larger tuple, it puts more of a restriction on what we can
play, and so even though our opponent is not, strictly speaking, using his y-strategy,
he is using a strategy which is even stronger). We had a winning strategy when
our opponent could only choose the ﬁrst approximation. We will still follow this
winning strategy, playing against the tuples our opponent plays which extend the
tuples which we add to the isomorphism.
If our opponent uses the ﬁrst approximation, then we will win because we used
the strategy that we already had to beat them in this case. If they use the second
approximation, then we force them to play their winning strategy from the case
a2
0 = y. So no matter what we play, we are forced to choose a′′′
0 ∉R because this is
the only way that our winning strategy from before with just the ﬁrst approximation
could lose in this new game. But now x ∈R, so we win.
Now we said above that we do not have to worry about more complicated pos-
sibilities for the approximation, like if we think that the approximation is ∞0, then
1, then ∞0, then 2, then ∞0, and so on. This is because every time that we think
that the approximation is ∞0, our partial isomorphism looks like ab′¯b0¯a′
0c′ ¯d′¯e for
some additional tuple ¯e. Because our opponent can play any tuple they like, and
also we can respond in the same way whether the approximation becomes 1, 2, and
so on, these are all essentially the same position in the game—we can play from
any of these positions in the same way that we would play from any other. The
values 1, 2, etc. are eﬀectively the same for our purposes in the games above be-


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
85
cause we have not added a coding location for 1, 2, etc. and so they all put only
the requirement that 0 not be coded as “yes.” If, for example, 1, 2, and 3 all had
coding locations as well, then it would be 4, 5, and so on that were all equivalent.
We play the game starting at a stage s only for those coding locations that exist
at the stage s. If we are only worrying about coding ﬁnitely many elements of A,
then after some bounded number of steps, the approximation our opponent plays
will have to repeat in this way. So there is some bound N such that if we can beat
our opponent when he plays only N stages of the approximation, then we can beat
him when he plays any number of stages.
The process starts to get more complicated when we are coding more than two
elements. There become even more possibilities for what could happen with the
coding which our opponent could play. If we are only coding ﬁnitely many elements
of A, the tuple ¯a0 will be exactly as long as the number of possibilities which we have
to consider. Viewing the requirements on ¯a0 as a game means that we can ignore
the exact details of all of the possibilities for the approximation, while keeping the
important properties, like the fact that there are ﬁnitely many possibilities.
In
the next section, we will formally deﬁne the game which we have used informally
throughout this section.
Now in general, we are trying to code all of the elements of A. At each stage s,
we code only ﬁnitely many facts, each labeled by the function Ls, and we add only
ﬁnitely many new coding locations at each stage. We will maintain the property, at
each stage s, that we can win the game described above for those coding locations
(by which we mean that we must maintains properties (C1), (C2), (C3), and
(C4) for those coding locations). Then whenever we add new coding locations, we
must show that our winning strategy for the game at the previous stage gives rise
to a winning strategy which includes these new coding locations. In this way, even
though there are inﬁnitely many coding locations which we will have to deal with
eventually, at each point we only consider a game where we deal with ﬁnitely many
of them. The choice of the new coding locations will have to take into account the
winning strategy for the game at the previous stage.
5.4
The Game Gs and the Final Condition
We return to giving the last condition (WS). So far, we have put no requirement
on the construction to reﬂect the fact that some of the elements have to be chosen
to be 2-free, or that we can mark how many separate occasions we have believed
that some x is in A. At each stage s of the construction, we will associate a game
Gs with two players, I and II. Condition (WS) will simply be
(WS) I has an arithmetic winning strategy for Gs.
This stands for winning strategy.
In the game Gs, I goes ﬁrst. On their turns, I plays a partial injection G ∶ω →C,
interpreted as a partial isomorphism D →C; on the ﬁrst turn, I is required to play
a partial isomorphism extending Fs. In response to G, II plays some elements ¯c ∈C


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
86
which are not in the range of G, viewed as elements in the range of an extension of
G, and a string α which is a possible value for σt for t > s. The string α must either
be a string in dom(L) which has no proper extensions in dom(L), or σˆη where
σˆx ∈dom(L) for some x ∈ω+. Let dom(L)∗be the set of these strings. Here, η
is a symbol which we can think of as representing some k ∈ω for which σˆk has
not yet been visited, but we do not want to diﬀerentiate between diﬀerent values
of k. Thus σˆη should be viewed as being to the right of every extension of σ in
dom(L). By convention, τˆη is not in T . The approximation (σt)t∈ω must satisfy
the properties from Lemma 5.6. So we also restrict II and force him to play strings
which form subsequences of sequences with the properties from the lemma. So if II
plays some string to the left of τ after playing τ, then II can never play any string
extending τ again. Also, for any string τ and x ∈ω, if II plays a string τˆy for
y > x (or y = η), then II can never again play a string extending τˆx. Note that this
does not apply to strings which end with η (conceptually, II should be thought of
as playing σˆk for increasingly large values of k).
At stage s, we do not yet know the actual values of the approximation (σt)t∈ω
after stage s. We could compute ﬁnitely many future stages, but not all of them.
In playing the α ∈T , II plays a possible future value of the approximation which we
have to be able to handle. When I plays a partial isomorphism G in response, it is
an attempt to continue the construction assuming that the approximation is as II
has played it. But I only has to continue the construction in a limited manner: they
must maintain the coding given by Ls, but they do not need to add more coding
locations to Ls. Since we will not be adding new elements to Ls, we will let L = Ls,
k = ks, and m = ms for the rest of this section and the next.
Now during the construction there will be certain elements which we will have
to add to our partial isomorphism. For example, condition (Surj) requires us to
add elements in order to make the isomorphism bijective. We will also have to add
free elements in order to code new strings; we have some control over these in that
we can choose which free element we choose, but not total control in that we are
restricted to the free elements. This is the role of the tuples ¯c which are played
by II in response to a play G by I: they are elements which I is required to add to
G before continuing the construction. They will also be useful for more technical
reasons in the next section.
Now we will state the ways in which I can lose. If I does not lose at any ﬁnite
stage, then they win (thus it is a closed game). First, there are some conditions on
the coding by G. If I plays G in response to α, then I must ensure that for each
σ ∈dom(L):
(C1†) if σ ∈T∞and σ ⊂α then G(L(σ)) ∈∉R;
(C2†) if σ ∈T∞and σ ⊄α but σ−⊂α, then G(L(σ)) ∈R;
(C3†) if σ ∈Tω and σ ⊂α then G(L(σ),... ,L(σ) + k(σ) −1)) ∈Rm(σ); and
(C4†) if σ ∈Tω and σ ⊄α but σ−⊂α then G(L(σ),... ,L(σ) + k(σ) −1) ∉Rm(σ).


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
87
These are conditions which ensure that G codes α using the coding locations given
by L; they are the equivalents of conditions (C1), (C2), (C3), and (C4) respec-
tively for the Fs.
Now we also have global agreement conditions which are the equivalents of (At)
and (Ext). There is a slight modiﬁcation to (At) and (Ext), which is that if I
plays G, and II responds by playing ¯c and α, then we use Gˆ¯c rather than G
because the ¯c are elements that must be added to the image of G before the next
move. Suppose that so far, I has played G0 ⊃Fs,G1,... ,Gn and II has played
(¯c0,α1),... ,(¯cn,αn+1). Note that the two indices of a move by II diﬀer by one, so
that II plays (¯ci,αi+1) rather than (¯ci,αi). This will turn out to be more convenient
later. By convention, we let α0 = σs and ¯cn+1 the empty tuple (or, if II plays the
strings βi, then β0 = σs, and so on). Now I must play a partial isomorphism Gn+1
which codes αn+1. In addition to the four requirements above, I must also ensure
that:
(At†) Giˆ¯ci ≤0 Gi+1,
(Ext1†) for each 0 ≤i < n + 1, if σ ∈T (so σ does not end in η), σ ⊂αi, and
σ ⊂αn+1, then for all x ≤L(σ), Gi(x) = Gn+1(x); if αi = αn+1 and they do
not end in η, then in fact Giˆ¯ci ⊂Gn+1, and
(Ext2†) for each t ≤s and 0 ≤i < n + 1, if σ ∈T (so σ does not end in η), σ ⊂σt,
and σ ⊂αn+1, then for all x ≤L(σ), Ft(x) = Gn+1(x); if σt = αn+1 and they
do not end in η, then in fact Ft ⊂Gn+1.
A winning strategy for I is a just way to continue the construction, but without
having to add any new strings to Ls. Because II can play any appropriate string α,
the strategy is independent of the future values σs+1,σs+2,... of the approximation.
5.5
Basic Plays and the Basic Game Gbs
The game Gs requires I to play inﬁnitely many moves in order to win. However, II
has only ﬁnitely many diﬀerent strings in dom(L)∗which they can play, and so if
they extend the approximation for inﬁnitely many stages, they must repeat some
strings inﬁnitely many times. In this section, we will deﬁne a game which is like Gs,
except that II is not allowed to have the approximation loop more than once. The
main lemma here will be that if I can beat II when II is restricted to only playing
one loop, then I can win in general. The idea is that at the end of a loop in the
approximation, the game ends up in essentially the same place it was before the
loop. So if I does not lose to any single loop, they do not lose to any sequence of
loops. These plays with only one loop will be called the basic plays, and the game
with no loops the basic game Gb
s.
Whether or not a play by II is a basic play depends only on the strings α in the
play, and is independent of the tuples ¯c. We say that a play (¯c0,α1),... ,(¯cℓ−1,αℓ)
by II is based on the list α1,... ,αℓ. A play based on α1,... ,αℓis a basic play (and
the list of strings it is based on is a basic list) if it satisﬁes:


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
88
(B1) for i < l −1, αi ≠αi+1 (though αℓ−1 may be equal to αℓ), and
(B2) if for some i < j there is some τ ∈T such that τˆ∞⊂αi, τˆ∞⊂αj, and for
all k with i < k < j, αk = τˆη, then j = ℓand αi = αj.
These conditions include α0 = σs; so, for example, if α1 = σs, then ℓ= 1 by (B1).
Note that all of these deﬁnitions are dependent on the stage s. So really, we are
deﬁning what it meas to be a basic play at stage s.
The ﬁrst of two important facts about the basic plays is the following lemma.
Lemma 5.8. There are ﬁnitely many basic lists.
Proof. The domain of L is ﬁnite, and hence dom(L)∗is ﬁnite. Since II can only play
strings from dom(L)∗, there are only ﬁnitely many diﬀerent σ which can appear
as one of the αi in a basic list. Let α1,... ,αℓbe a basic list. We will show that
ℓis bounded, and hence there are only ﬁnitely many basic lists. Let M be the
size of dom(L)∗.
In any suﬃciently long basic list, say α1,... ,αN of length at
least N (depending on M), there must be three indices i1 < i2 < i3 < N such that
αi1 = αi2 = αi3. Since i3 < N, by (B1) there must be j1 and j2 with i1 < j1 < i2
and i2 < j2 < i3 with αj1 ≠αi1 and αj2 ≠αi2. Let τ1 and τ2 be the greatest common
initial segments of the j with i1 ≤j ≤i2 and i2 ≤j ≤i3 respectively. Let x be
such that τ1ˆx ⊆αi1 = αi2. Since there is j1 with i1 < j1 < i2 and τ1ˆx ⊈αj1,
we cannot have x ∈ω. So x = ∞or x = η. First, suppose that x = ∞. Then for
all j1 with i1 < j1 < i2, we cannot have τ1ˆz ⊆αj1 for some z ∈ω, since for any
such z with τ1ˆz ∈L, some string τ ′ ⊇τ1ˆz appeared before i1 and hence τ1ˆz can
never appear again. So, by decreasing i2 and increasing i1, we may assume that
τ1ˆ∞⊆αi1, τ1ˆ∞⊆αi2, and for all j1 with i1 < j1 < i2, τ1ˆη ⊆αj1 (though we may
no longer have αi1 = αi2). This contradicts (B2). So we must have x = η, and so
τ1ˆη = αi1 = αi2. Similarly, we must have τ2ˆη = αi3 = αi2. Thus τ1 = τ2—call this
τ. Then there are j1 and j2 with i1 < j1 < i2 < j2 < i3 and τˆ∞⊆αj1 and τˆ∞⊆αj2.
For all i with j1 < i < j2, we have τ ⊆αi. Thus, increasing j1 and decreasing j2,
we may assume that for all such i, τˆη = αi. This contradicts (B2). So there is no
basic list of length greater than N.
The basic game Gb
s is the same as the game Gs, except that we add a new
requirement for II: any play by II must be a basic play. If, at any point in the
game, II has violated one of the conditions of the basic plays, then II loses. The
next lemma is the second important fact about the basic plays; it says that they
are the only plays which I has to know how to win against.
Lemma 5.9. If I has a winning strategy for the basic game Gb
s, then I has a winning
strategy for the game Gs. Moreover, if I has an arithmetic winning strategy for Gb
s,
then they have an arithmetic winning strategy for Gs.
Proof. Let Sb be a winning strategy for I in the basic game Gb
s. We must give a
winning strategy S for I in the game Gs. To each play P by II in the game Gs,
S must give I’s response S(P).
To each play P, we will associate a basic play
P ∗. I will respond to P in the same way that they responded to the corresponding


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
89
basic play P ∗; that is, S(P) will be Sb(P ∗). If P is (¯c0,α1),... ,(¯cm−1,αm) and
P ∗is ( ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn) then we will have αm = βn. Thus since (C1†), (C2†),
(C3†), (C4†), and (Ext2†) hold for I playing Sb(P ∗) in response to P ∗, they will
also hold for I playing S(P) = Sb(P ∗) in response to P.
The general strategy to construct P ∗from P will be to build P ∗up inductively.
If P is not a basic play, it is because it fails to satisfy (B1) and (B2). In the ﬁrst
case, this means that for some i, αi = αi+1, and so in P ∗we will omit αi. In the
second case, we will be able to omit everything between the i and j witnessing the
failure of (B2). The diﬃculty is to do this in a well-deﬁned way, so that we have
a nice relationship between Q∗and P ∗when P is a longer play which includes Q.
This is necessary to ensure that Sb(Q) and Sb(P) are related in the correct way,
e.g. by (Ext1†). It will be suﬃcient to build up P ∗inductively from the deﬁnition
of Q∗in a natural way, but there are a number of things to check.
There is a condition (∗) relating P and P ∗which, intuitively, says that P ∗
captures the essence of P (i.e., P ∗omits only non-essential plays from P). Let
G0 ⊃Fs,G1,... ,Gm be I’s response to P and H0 ⊃Fs,H1,... ,Hn be I’s response
to P ∗. Let ˜F ∶ω →C be a partial isomorphism and γ ∈dom(L)∗. Then denote by
Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,i) the statement:
• for all σ ∈T , if σ ⊂βi and σ ⊂γ, then for all x ≤L(σ), Hi(x) = ˜F(x). If βi = γ
and they do not end in η, then in fact Hiˆ ¯di ⊂˜F.
and by Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,j) the statement:
• for all σ ∈T , if σ ⊂αj and σ ⊂γ, then for all x ≤L(σ), Gj(x) = ˜F(x). If
αj = γ and they do not end in η, then in fact Gjˆ¯cj ⊂˜F.
Then (∗) says that for any ˜F and γ such that for all i with 0 ≤i ≤n the statement
Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,i) holds, then for the same ˜F and γ and for all j with 0 ≤j ≤m the
statement Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,j) holds.
Now suppose that (∗) holds for P and P ∗, and that we want to check (Ext1†)
for the response Hn = Gm = S(P) = Sb(P ∗) to P. Choose ˜F = Hn = Gm and
γ = αm = βn. We know that Sb is a winning strategy in the basic game, and so
I does not lose by playing Hn. Thus (Ext1†) must hold in the basic game. This
implies, for all i ≤n, the statement Φ(P ∗,Hn,γ,i). Then by (∗), we know that
for all i ≤m, we have Ψ(P,Gm,γ,i). This implies (Ext1†) for the full game at P.
Thus, instead of checking (Ext1†), it suﬃces to check property (∗).
We will deﬁne the operation P →P ∗by induction on the length of P. At the
same time, we will show that the strategy S for I does not lose at any ﬁnite point
in the game (and hence, it must win), and also that P and P ∗have (∗). If we show
(∗), then the only thing remaining to see that I does not lose is to check (At†). Let
P be (¯c0,α1),... ,(¯cℓ,αℓ+1) and suppose that the operation Q →Q∗is deﬁned for
plays of length up to ℓ. Let Q be ﬁrst ℓplays in P, that is, (¯c0,α1),... ,(¯cℓ−1,αℓ),
so that Q∗has already been deﬁned. We have three possibilities.
Case 1. Q∗followed by (¯cℓ,αℓ+1) is a basic play.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
90
Let P ∗be Q∗followed by (¯cℓ,αℓ+1); this is already a basic play.
First we check (∗). Fix γ and ˜F. Let H0,H1,... ,Hn be I’s response to Q∗and
G0,G1,... ,Gℓbe I’s response to Q. Let Hn+1 = Gℓ+1 = Sb(P ∗) = S(P). Suppose
that, for each i ≤n + 1, we have Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,i). Then, from Φ(P ∗, ˜F ,γ,i) for i ≤n
and (∗) for Q and Q∗, we get Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,j) for i ≤ℓ. Note that Φ(P ∗, ˜F ,γ,ℓ+ 1)
is the same as Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,n + 1) since Hn+1 = Gℓ+1. So, for all j ≤ℓ+ 1, we have
Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,j). Thus we have (∗).
Now we need to check (At†) to see that I does not lose Gs by responding to
P with Sb(P ∗) = H. So we need to show that S(Q)ˆ¯cℓ≤0 Hn+1. Since I does
not lose Gb
s when responding to P ∗with Hn+1, we have Sb(Q∗)ˆ¯cℓ≤0 Hn+1. But
Sb(Q∗) = S(Q), so (At†) holds for S.
Case 2. Q∗followed by (¯cℓ,αℓ+1) does not satisfy (B1).
Let Q∗be ( ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn).
It must be the case that βn−1 = βn.
Let
H0,H1,... ,Hn be I’s response to Q∗; then Hn−1ˆ ¯dn−1 ⊂Hn.
Let ¯e be a tu-
ple of elements from C such that Hn−1ˆ ¯dn−1ˆ¯e = Hn and let P ∗be the play
( ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−2,βn−1),( ¯dn−1ˆ¯eˆ¯cℓ,αℓ+1). Since Q∗satisﬁed (B2) and βn−1 = βn,
P ∗satisﬁes (B2) and hence is a basic play.
Now we will check (∗). Fix γ and ˜F. Recall that H0,H1,... ,Hn is I’s response
to Q∗in the basic game, and let G0,G1,... ,Gℓbe I’s response to Q; let Gℓ+1 = H′
n
be Sb(P ∗) = S(P). Then H0,H1,... ,Hn−1,H′
n is I’s response to P ∗. Suppose that
for each i ≤n we have Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,i). Then since Gℓ+1 = H′
n and αℓ+1 is the last play
by II in both P and P ∗, we immediately have Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,ℓ+1). To show Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,j)
for j ≤ℓ, it suﬃces to show Ψ(Q, ˜F,γ,j) for j ≤ℓ, and hence (by (∗) for Q and Q∗)
to show Φ(Q∗, ˜F,γ,i) for i ≤n.
Now P ∗and Q∗agree on ( ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−2,βn−1), so we have Φ(Q∗, ˜F,γ,i) for
i ≤n −2. Now Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,n −1) says that: for all σ ∈T , if σ ⊂βn−1 and σ ⊂γ, then
for all x ≤L(σ), Hn−1(x) = ˜F(x); and moreover, if βn−1 = γ and they do not end in
η, then in fact Hn−1ˆ ¯dn−1ˆ¯eˆ¯cℓ= Hnˆ¯cℓ⊂˜F. This implies both Φ(Q∗, ˜F ,γ,n −1)
and Φ(Q∗, ˜F ,γ,n) since Hn−1 ⊂Hn. Thus, for all i ≤n, we have Φ(Q∗, ˜F,γ,i).
This completes the proof of (∗).
Now we need to check (At†). Since I does not lose Gb
s when responding to P ∗
with H′
n = Gℓ+1, by (At†) we have that Hn−1ˆ ¯dn−1ˆ¯eˆ¯cℓ≤0 H′
n. But Hn−1ˆ ¯dn−1ˆ¯e =
Sb(Q∗) = S(Q), so S(Q) ≤0 S(P). So (At†) holds for S.
Case 3. Q∗followed by (¯cℓ,αℓ+1) satisﬁes (B1) but does not satisfy (B2).
Let Q∗be ( ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn).
Now Q∗satisﬁes (B2), so there are two
possible reasons that Q∗followed by (¯cℓ,αℓ+1) might fail to satisfy (B2).
Subcase 3.1. τˆ∞⊂βm = βn but for each k with m < k < n, βk = τˆη
Choose m to be least with the above property.
For any k with m < k < n,
βk = τˆη.
Let H0,H1,... ,Hn be I’s play in response to Q∗.
We have Hm ⊂
Hn. Let ¯e be a tuple of elements of C such that Hmˆ¯e = Hn. Then let P ∗be
( ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dm−1,βm),(¯eˆ¯cℓ,αℓ+1). This is a basic play since Q∗was. Note that
I’s play in response to P ∗is H0,H1,... ,Hm,H′ for some partial isomorphism H′.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
91
Now we will check (∗).
Let G0,G1,... ,Gℓbe I’s response to Q, so that I’s
response to P is G0,G1,... ,Gℓ,Gℓ+1 = H′. Fix γ and ˜F. Suppose that for each
i ≤n we have Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,i). Since both P and P ∗end in αℓ+1, Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,i) implies
Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,ℓ+ 1). Now for j ≤ℓ, Ψ(Q, ˜F,γ,j) implies Ψ(P, ˜F,γ,j), and so by (∗)
for Q and Q∗, it suﬃces to show that for all i ≤n, we have Φ(Q∗, ˜F,γ,i).
For the ﬁrst m turns, Q∗and P ∗agree, and so for i ≤m, Φ(P ∗, ˜F,γ,i) implies
Φ(Q∗, ˜F ,γ,i). So we have established Φ(Q∗, ˜F,γ,i) for i ≤m.
For m < i < n, we have βi = τˆη. To show Φ(Q∗, ˜F,γ,i), it suﬃces to check that
if σ ∈T has σ ⊂τ and σ ⊂γ, then for all x ≤L(σ), Gj(x) = ˜F(x). Now σ ⊂τ ⊂αi,
so Gi(x) = ˜F(x) for all x ≤G(σ). By (Ext1†), for all x ≤L(σ), Gi(x) = Gj(x),
and hence Gj(x) = ˜F(x).
Finally, we have the case i = n. We have βn = βi. If σ ∈T has σ ⊂βn and
σ ⊂γ, then σ ⊂βi and so for all x ≤L(σ), Gn(x) = Gi(x) = ˜F(x). We also need
to consider the case where γ = βn. By Φ(P ∗, ˜F ,γ,i), we have that Giˆ¯e ⊂˜F; but
Giˆ¯e = Gn and so Gn ⊂˜F as desired. Thus we have Ψ(Q∗, ˜F,γ,n). This completes
the proof of (∗).
So I responds to P with Sb(P ∗) = H. To see that this does not lose the game
for I, we just need to check (At†). Since I does not lose Gb
s when responding to P ∗
with H, by (At†) we have Giˆ¯eˆ¯cℓ+1 ≤0 H. But Giˆ¯e = Gn, so Gnˆ¯cℓ+1 ≤0 H as
required.
Subcase 3.2. There is i ≤n and τ ∈T such that τˆ∞⊂βi and τˆ∞⊂αℓ+1 but for
each k with i < k ≤n, τˆη = βk. Also, βi ≠αℓ+1.
Let ˆQ be ( ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn),(¯cℓ,βi). We can now use the same argument
as in the previous subcase, with ˆQ being extended by (∅,αℓ+1).
The whole construction of S from Sb by transforming plays P into basic plays
P ∗is arithmetic.
Now any winning strategy for I in Gs is also a winning strategy in Gb
s; in partic-
ular, if I has an arithmetic winning strategy for Gs, then they have an arithmetic
winning strategy in Gb
s. However, it would be nice if we did not have to worry
about the computability-theoretic properties of the winning strategy during our
arguments. The following lemma lets us do exactly that.
Corollary 5.10. The following are equivalent:
(1) I has a winning strategy for Gs.
(2) I has an arithmetic winning strategy for Gs.
(3) I has a winning strategy for Gb
s.
(4) I has an arithmetic winning strategy for Gb
s.
Proof. We have (4) ⇒(2) from the previous lemma.
(2) ⇒(1) is immediate.
(1) ⇒(3) is because any winning strategy for I in Gs is a winning strategy for
Gb
s. So it remains to prove (3) ⇒(4). In Gb
s, each player makes only ﬁnitely many


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
92
moves in every play of the game, and there is a computable bound on the number
of moves. Any such game with a winning strategy for I has an arithmetic winning
strategy for I.
So in order to check (WS), it suﬃces to show that I has a winning strategy
without worrying about whether it is arithmetic.
5.6
The Construction
Begin at stage s = −1 with F−1 = L−1 = ∅.
At each subsequent stage s + 1, we will ﬁrst update the partial isomorphism
from the previous stage according to the new approximation. To do this, we will
use the winning strategy from the game Gs which we had at the previous stage.
Then we will add new elements to the image of the isomorphism, and add a new
coding location. We must add these new elements so that all of the properties from
Section 5.2 are satisﬁed.
At stage s + 1, σs+1 ∉dom(Ls) but σ−
s+1 ∈dom(Ls). (Recall that σ−
s+1 is σs+1
with the last entry removed.) We begin by using our winning strategy for Gs to code
σ−
s+1 correctly. If there is some x ∈ω+ such that σ−
s+1ˆx ∈dom(Ls), then ℓ(σs+1) ∈ω;
let τ = σ−
s+1ˆη. Otherwise, let τ = σ−
s+1. I has an arithmetic winning strategy S for
the game Gs from the previous stage. Consider these ﬁrst couple moves of the game
where I uses the strategy S: I plays G0 ⊃Fs, II plays (∅,τ), and I responds with
G according to their winning strategy S. Fs+1 will be an extension of G. Since G
was part of the winning strategy for I, it did not lose the game. So, automatically,
Fs+1 will satisfy (C1), (C2), (C3), and (C4) for σ ∈dom(Ls), (At), and (Ext)
since G already satisﬁes these.
Suppose that the domain of G is {0,... ,n}. Let t < s + 1 be the previous stage
at which σt = σ−
s+1. Then by (Surj) at stage t, the ﬁrst ∣σt∣−1 elements of C appear
in ran(Ft ↾Lt(σt)). By (Ext), Ft ⊂G. If the ﬁrst ∣σs+1∣−1 elements of C do not
appear in ran(G), then it is because the (∣σs+1∣−1)th element is not in ran(G); let
this element be a, and deﬁne G′ extending G by G′(n + 1) = a. Set Ls+1 to be the
extension of Ls with Ls+1(σs+1) = n + 2. Then any Fs+1 extending G′ will satisfy
(Surj). Also, since σs+1 ∈dom(Ls+1), we satisfy (CLoc).
While we have set Ls+1(σs+1) = n + 2, we have not yet added an element into
that position. What remains to be done is to add some element in the position n+2
(or a tuple in the positions n+2,n+3,... if σs+1 ∈Tω) to satisfy (C1), (C2), (C3),
and (C4) for σ = σs+1 and also to give a winning strategy witnessing (WS). There
are two cases depending on the last entry of σs+1. The ﬁrst is relatively easy while
the second is much harder.
5.6.1
The case σs+1 ∈T∞
Let b ∉R be an element which is 2-free over ran(G′). Let Fs+1 extend G′ with
Fs+1(n + 2) = c. Deﬁne ms+1(σs+1) = −1 and ks+1(σs+1) = 1. Then Fs+1 satisﬁes


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
93
(C1), (C2), (C3), and (C4) for σ = σs+1, which was the last remaining case of
those properties.
We must show that I has a winning strategy in the game Gb
s+1. The only diﬀer-
ence between Gb
s+1 and Gb
s is that in Gb
s+1 we have added a new coding location σs+1
to L, and Gb
s starts a turn earlier than Gb
s+1. We can accommodate the latter by
considering plays in Gb
s which begin with (∅,σs+1), thus making I play G as their
ﬁrst play. So every part of the approximation that our opponent plays in Gb
s+1 is
an approximation that our opponent could have played in Gb
s, except that in Gb
s+1
II can also play σs+1 and σ−
s+1ˆη.
As a ﬁrst approximation, we could use the strategy S from the previous stage
(and when our opponent plays σs+1 or σ−
s+1ˆη, we respond instead to σ−
s+1). This
works except for one thing, which is that when our opponent plays either σs+1 or
σ−
s+1ˆη, we are not guaranteed to code σs+1 correctly. Now, when our opponent
plays σs+1, our response using S will extend Fs+1 = Gab with b ∉R coding σs+1
(this is because by (Ext1†) and (Ext2†) our response must extend our response
at the previous stage where the approximation was σ−
s+1). The only problem is that
when our opponent plays σ−
s+1ˆη, S will also have us respond with an extension of
Fs+1 = Gab, but now b is coding the wrong thing. This is relatively easy to ﬁx. Say
S has us respond with Gab¯c. Since b is 2-free over Ga, we can ﬁnd b′ ∈R and ¯c′
with Gab¯c ≤1 Gab′¯b′. Then we will play Gab′¯c′.
In order to continue to follow the strategy S at later stages, we cannot tell S that
our opponent plays σs+1 or σ−
s+1ˆη because this is an illegal play in Gb
s. However,
we can tell S that our opponent played σ−
s+1 and pretend that we responded with
Gab¯c. We will keep track of these corresponding plays for the purposes of using S.
So along with deﬁning the strategy T for Gb
s, we will describe a correspondence
between plays by II in Gb
s+1 and Gb
s. If II plays (¯c0,α1),... ,(¯cn−1,αn), the corre-
sponding play in Gb
s will be of the form (∅,σ−
s+1),(ab ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn). Note
that the length of the play in Gb
s is one more than of that in Gb
s+1; this is because
Gb
s begins at the previous stage, and so we need to begin by playing G and adding
a and b to the image of the isomorphism. Thus the ﬁrst play using the strategy S
will be G, and before the second play I will be forced to add ab to G, and thus I
is essentially playing Fs+1. We can already deﬁne β1,... ,βn−1, but the ¯di will be
deﬁned at the same time as we deﬁne T . If αi is in dom(Ls)∗, then βi and αi will
be equal. Otherwise, αi is either σs+1 or σ−
s+1ˆη, and βi will be the longest initial
segment which is in dom(Ls)∗, which is βi = σ−
s+1.
Now we will deﬁne T and the ¯di by an alternating inductive deﬁnition. Suppose
that so far we have deﬁned I’s response G0 ⊃Fs+1,G1,... ,Gn−1 when II plays
(¯c0,α1),... ,(¯cn−2,αn−1).
We will also have deﬁned a corresponding play by II
in Gb
s, (∅,σ−
s+1),(abˆ ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−2,βn−1). Let F ′ ⊃Fs,G,H1,... ,Hn−1 be I’s
response to this using S. We will have ensured that if αi = σ−
s+1ˆη then Hi ≤1 Gi,
and otherwise that Hi = Gi and for each i and ¯di = ¯ci. Recall that Gˆab = Fs+1.
It is now II’s turn, and suppose that II plays (¯cn−1,αn), and that this is a basic
play by II. We must deﬁne ¯dn−1 and then deﬁne I’s response Gn.
Note that if
αi = αi+1 = σ−
s+1ˆη, then i + 1 = n by (B1).
There are four cases depending on the values of αn−1 and αn. When neither of


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
94
αn−1 nor αn are σ−
s+1η, then we can just follow S. Then we have three more cases
depending on whether one (or both) of αn−1 and αn are σ−
s+1η.
Case 1: αn−1,αn ≠σ−
s+1ˆη. In this case we can simply follow S. Let ¯dn−1 = ¯cn−1. Let
Gn = Hn be I’s response, using S, to
(∅,σ−
s+1),(abˆ ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn).
Case 2: αn−1 = σ−
s+1ˆη and αn ≠σ−
s+1ˆη. We have Hn−1 ≤1 Gn−1. Let ¯dn−1 be such
that Gn−1¯cn−1 ≤0 Hn−1 ¯dn−1. Now let Gn = Hn be I’s response, using S, to
(∅,σ−
s+1),(abˆ ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn).
Case 3: αn−1 ≠σ−
s+1ˆη and αn = σ−
s+1ˆη. Let ¯dn−1 = ¯cn−1. Now let Hn be I’s response,
using S, to
(∅,σ−
s+1),(abˆ ¯d0,β1),... ,( ¯dn−1,βn).
Note that since αn = σ−
s+1ˆη, βn = σ−
s+1. Then Hn ⊇Fs+1 = Gab, say Hn =
Gab¯e. The using the fact that b is free over Ga, choose b′ ∈R and ¯e′ such
Hn ≤1 Gab′¯e′. Then set Gn = Gab′¯e′.
Case 4: αn−1 = αn = σ−
s+1ˆη. Set Gn = Gn−1¯cn−1. Since αn−1 = αn, there are no longer
basic plays than this, and so we do not need to deﬁne ¯dn−1.
It is tedious but easy to see that none of these plays by I is a losing play. Hence
I has a winning strategy T in Gb
s+1.
5.6.2
The case σs+1 ∈Tω
By Lemma 5.8, there are only ﬁnitely many basic lists on which II’s basic plays are
based. Let b1,... ,bm be these basic lists, where bi is the list βi
1,βi
2,... ,βi
ℓi.
We must add a tuple ¯b to the image of our partial isomorphism, setting Fs+1 = G¯b.
The tuple ¯b will be made up of tuples ¯b1,... ,¯bm from C. Let ¯ǫ1,... , ¯ǫm be tuples
of elements in {−1,1} be such that ¯bj ∈R¯ǫj. If we set ms+1(σ) = ¯ǫ1ˆ⋯ˆ¯ǫm and
ks+1(σs+1) = ∣¯b1∣+ ⋯+ ∣¯bm∣, then (C1)-(C4) will be satisﬁed. So we just have to
make sure that ¯b1,... ,¯bm are chosen such that (WS) is satisﬁed, that is, I has a
winning strategy for the game Gs+1 (or, equivalently, Gb
s+1).
To choose the tuples ¯b1,... ,¯bm, we will deﬁne a new class of games. For each
r ≤m, ¯b1,... ,¯br tuples of elements of C, and tuples ¯ǫ1,... , ¯ǫr which are tuples of 1s
and −1s (with ǫi the same length as ¯bi), we have a game H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr). We do
not require, for the deﬁnition of the game, that ¯bj ∈R¯ǫj. We allow the case r = 0;
that is, H(∅) is a game. H(∅) will be essentially the game Gb
s, and we will be able
to easily turn a winning strategy for I in Gb
s into a winning strategy for I in H(∅).
Then we will use the winning strategy for H(∅) to show that we can choose ¯b1 and
¯ǫ1 so that we have a winning strategy for I in H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1), and we will use that winning
strategy to show that we can choose ¯b2 and ¯ǫ2 so that we have a winning strategy
for I in H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;¯b2, ¯ǫ2), and so on. Eventually we will be able to choose ¯b1,... ,¯bm


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
95
and ¯ǫ1,... , ¯ǫm so that we have a winning strategy for H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯bm, ¯ǫm). We will
choose the tuples so that if we make the deﬁnition of Fs+1, ms+1, and ks+1 above,
this winning strategy will immediately yield a winning strategy for I in Gb
s+1.
Here are the rules for the game H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr). I begins by playing a partial
isomorphism G0 which extends Ga¯b1⋯¯bi. Then, II and I alternate, with II playing
a tuple of elements from C and a string in dom(Ls+1)∗, and I playing a partial
isomorphism. As in Gb
s+1, II must make a play which is based on one of the basic lists.
I can lose by violating one of (C1†)-(C4†) for σ ∈dom(Ls)∗(not dom(L∗
s+1), since
we have not yet deﬁned ms+1(σs+1) and ks+1(σs+1)). I can also lose by violating
(At†)-(Ext2†) using L = Ls+1. Finally, I must ensure that
(CB†) whenever I is responding with a partial isomorphism H to a basic play
(¯c0,βi
1),... ,(¯cℓi−1,βi
ℓi) based on bi for i ≤r, and βℓi = σ−
s+1ˆη, then
H(n + ∣¯b1∣+ ⋯+ ∣¯bi−1∣+ 1),... ,H(n + ∣¯a1∣+ ⋯+ ∣¯bi−1∣+ ∣¯bi∣) ∉R¯ǫi.
This condition (CB†) will be what is required to ensure (C4†) for σ = σs+1.
The choice of ¯b1,... ,¯bm involves three lemmas. We will begin by stating the
ﬁrst two lemmas and using them to prove induction step of the third lemma before
returning to the proofs of the ﬁrst two.
Lemma 5.11. Suppose that I wins H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr). Let ¯c be such that I’s ﬁrst
play using their winning strategy for this game is Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯c. Let ¯ν be such that
¯c ∈R¯ν. Let x ∈C. Then for one of ι = 1 or ι = −1, I wins H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr; ¯cx, ¯νι).
Lemma 5.12. Let ¯c and ¯ν be as above. Let ι = 1 or ι = −1. If I wins the game
H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr; ¯cx, ¯νι) and
Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cx ≤1 Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cy,
then I wins H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr; ¯cy, ¯νι).
Lemma 5.13. There are ¯b1,... ,¯bm ∈C and ¯ǫ1,... , ¯ǫm such that I wins the game
H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯bm, ¯ǫm) and (¯b1,... ,¯bm) ∈R(¯ǫ1,...,¯ǫm).
Proof. The proof is by induction on r.
The ﬁrst step is to show that I has a
winning strategy for the game H(∅). Recall that I has a winning strategy S for
Gs, and S responds to (∅,σ−
s+1ˆη) with G. To any play P = ( ¯d0,α1),... ,( ¯dℓ−1,αℓ)
by II in H(∅), associate the play P ∗= (∅,σ−
s+1ˆη),(a ¯d0,α1),... ,( ¯dℓ−1,αℓ) in Gs.
A response Fs,G,H1,... ,Hℓto P ′ according to S which does not lose Gs gives rise
to a response Ga,H1,... ,Hℓwhich does not lose H(∅) (the conditions for I losing
in each game are essentially the same; the only diﬀerence is that Gs involves an
additional turn at the beginning). So the winning strategy S for Gs gives rise to a
winning strategy for H(∅).
Now for the induction step, suppose that we have tuples ¯b1,... ,¯br and ¯ǫ1,... , ¯ǫr
such that I wins H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr) and ¯bi ∈R¯ǫi. Let ¯c and ¯ν be as in the previous


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
96
lemmas, that is, I’s winning strategy begins by playing Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯c. Now choose an
element x ∉R which is 2-free over Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯c. Then choose y ∈R such that
Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cx ≤1 Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cy
Now by Lemma 5.11, I wins H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr; ¯cx, ¯νι) for either ι = 1 or ι = −1. If
x ∈Rι (i.e., ι = −1), then we are done. Otherwise, if ι = 1, then by Lemma 5.12,
I also wins H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr; ¯cy, ¯νι). But y ∈R and ι = 1, so this completes the
induction step.
The winning strategy for H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯bm, ¯ǫm) is a winning strategy for Gb
s+1.
We need to check that this strategy satisﬁes (C3†) and (C4†) for σs+1. The ﬁrst
follows from the choice of ms+1, and the fact that once II plays some string other
than σs+1, they can never again play σs+1.
The second is because the winning
strategy for H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯bm, ¯ǫm) satisﬁes (CB†) for each basic list.
Now we return to the omitted proofs.
Proof of Lemma 5.11. In order to simplify the notation, denote by G the game
H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr) and by G(ι) the game H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr; ¯cx, ¯νι) for ι = 1 and
ι = −1. We must show that I has a winning strategy for either G(−1) or G(1).
Suppose that I does not have a winning strategy for G(1). Then II has a winning
strategy for G(1). We also know that I has a winning strategy in G. We will show
that I has a winning strategy for G(−1).
The strategy for I will try to do two things. First, it will try to be the same
as I’s winning strategy for G. Then the only way for II to lose while using such a
strategy will be for II to use a basic play based on br+1, the r +1st basic list, and to
have I fail to satisfy (CB†) for this basic list. The second thing that I will try to do
is, if II follows the basic list br+1, to try and force II to use their winning strategy
from G(1). Since this is a winning strategy for II, I will fail to satisfy (CB†) in
G(1) for br+1. But failing to satisfy (CB†) in G(1) for some basic list is the same
as satisfying (CB†) in G(−1) for that basic list. So I will win G(−1).
Let S be I’s winning strategy for G, and T be II’s winning strategy for G(1).
We will deﬁne S′, a winning strategy for I in G(−1).
I must play ﬁrst. The ﬁrst move in G according to S is H0 = Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯c. Let
( ¯d0,β1) be II’s response to H0x according to their winning strategy T for G(1).
Then the strategy S′ for G(−1) will play G0 = H0b ¯d0 as I’s initial play. Note that
II has not actually played ( ¯d0,β1); I has just looked ahead at what II would play if
they were following the strategy T .
Now II must actually respond to G0. Suppose that they respond with (¯e0,α1).
If α1 ≠βr+1
1
, then since α1 is not part of the basic list βr+1, the winning and losing
conditions are the same as in G; have I respond to (¯e0,α1) as they would, using S,
to ( ¯d0¯e0,α1) in G. After this, I just continues to use S to win.
If instead α1 = βr+1
1
, then let H1 be I’s response, using S, to ( ¯d0¯e0,βr+1
1
). Let
( ¯d1,β2) be II’s response to H1 using the strategy T . Then once again the strategy
S′ will tell I to play G1 = H1 ¯d1.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
97
If I ever plays an αi ≠βr+1
i
, then II can win by following the strategy S. Oth-
erwise, S′ will have I play G0,G1,... in response to II playing (¯e0,β1),(¯e1,β2)....
There will be H0,H1,... which are plays according to S in response to II playing
( ¯d0¯e0,β1),( ¯d1¯e1,β2),.... Moreover, we will have Hi ⊂Gi.
Since H0,H1,... is a winning play against ( ¯d0¯e0,β1),( ¯d1¯e1,β2),... in G, we can
see that because all for the conditions (C1†)-(Ext2†) are satisﬁed for H0,H1,...,
they are also satisﬁed for G0,G1,... (the extra elements ¯di in Gi but not Hi are
included in (At†), (Ext1†), and (Ext2†) as the tuples which II plays).
Also,
(CB†) is satisﬁed for the basic lists b1,... ,br.
So the only way G0,G1,... could be a losing play against (¯e0,β1),(¯e1,β2)... is
if β1,β2,... is the basic play br+1 and (CB†) fails for this basic play. H0,H1,... is
a play by I against which II wins in G(1) using the strategy T . Then (CB†) fails in
G(1) for the basic list br+1, and so (CB†) must be satisﬁed in G(−1) for this basic
list.
So I wins this play of G(−1), and S′ is a winning strategy.
To prove Lemma 5.12, we ﬁrst need a quick technical lemma.
Lemma 5.14. Suppose that ¯x ≤1 ¯x′. Let ¯y be a tuple so that for no y ∈¯y is there
a y′ with ¯xy ≤1 ¯x′y′. Then for each tuple ¯z′, there is ¯z such that ¯x′¯z′ ≤0 ¯x¯z and
moreover ¯z is disjoint from ¯y.
Proof. For each y ∈¯y, and each y′ ∈C, there is some existential fact true about
y′ which is not true of y. Let ¯u′ be tuple of elements witnessing these existential
formulas for each z′ ∈¯z′. Then there are ¯z and ¯u such that ¯x′¯z′¯u′ ≤0 ¯x¯z¯u. So
¯x′¯z′ ≤0 ¯x¯z and each z ∈¯z satisﬁes an existential formula which no y ∈¯y satisﬁes.
Hence ¯z is disjoint from ¯y.
Proof of Lemma 5.12. Once again we will simplify the notation. For z = x or z = y,
let G(z) be the game H(¯b1, ¯ǫ1;... ;¯br, ¯ǫr; ¯cz, ¯νι).
Let T be a winning strategy for I in G(x). We need to ﬁnd a winning strategy
S for I in G(y). We will use the fact that
Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cx ≤1 Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cy
to convert T into the desired strategy S.
Let H0 ⊃Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cx be the initial play for I according to T . Let ¯u be the tuple
of elements such that H0 = Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cx¯u.
Let I = {i1,... ,in} be a maximal set of indices in ¯u such that there is a tuple ¯v
such that
Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cx¯uI ≤1 Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cy¯v
where ¯uI is (ui1,... ,uin). Let J be the rest of the indices.
The ﬁrst play according to S will be G0 = Ga¯b1⋯¯br¯cy¯v. We have HI
0 ≤1 G0
where HI
0 denotes H0 with the entries at indices in J removed.
Now suppose that II responds with ( ¯d0,α1). If α1 = σs+1, then I can play G0 ¯d0
in response to win (by property (B1) of basic lists). Otherwise, α1 ≠σs+1.


CHAPTER 5. A “FULLNESS” THEOREM FOR 2-CEA DEGREES
98
Using the fact that HI
0 ≤1 G0, choose ¯e0 such that G0 ¯d0 ≤0 HI
0 ¯e0.
By the
previous lemma, ¯e0 is disjoint from H0. Let H1 be the response, according to T ,
to (¯e0,α1). Let s be the permutation which moves those entries of H1 with indices
in J to the end (the permutation s ﬁxes anything not in the domain of H1, so that
for example if H′ ⊃H1, then applying the permutation s to H′ does not move the
indices J to the end of H′, but rather to somewhere in the middle). Then S will
tell I to respond to ( ¯d0,α1) with Hs
1, the application of the permutation s to H1.
To any further play (¯c1,α2),(¯c2,α3),..., S will respond in the same way as T ,
except that it will again apply the permutation s.
The games G(x) and G(y) are the same, except for the initial move; otherwise,
the ways in which I can lose are the same. The permutation s does not aﬀect any of
the conditions, since it only permutes indices which do not do any coding (i.e. above
everything in the image of Ls, and also above the position of x and y in G0 and H0
respectively). Since G0 ¯d0 ≤0 HI
0 ¯e0 ≤0 Hs
1, and if Hi ≤0 Hi+1 then Hs
i ≤0 Hs
i+1, (At†)
still holds. And as none of α1,... ,αℓare σs+1, (Ext1†) is not aﬀected by changing
the change from H0 to G0, and (Ext2†) is also not aﬀected by the application of
the permutation s. Thus I has a winning strategy for G(y).


Chapter 6
Further Questions
In this section we will list some of the unresolved questions from our investigation.
This is a new investigation and so there are many questions to be answered. We
have seen that there are many nice properties that degree spectra on a cone must
have.
Many degree spectra are well-known classes of degrees and satisfy many
“fullness” properties. But on the other hand, there are some interesting degree
spectra that are not so nicely behaved, like the incomparable degree spectra from
Theorem 1.6 and the relation on (ω,<) from 4.19. The general question is: to what
extent do the degree spectra avoid pathological behaviour? Of course, there are
many speciﬁc questions about particular types of pathological behaviour and many
questions arising directly out of results in this paper. We will take the opportunity
to list some of them here.
In Chapter 3 we gave a condition, involving d-free tuples, which was equivalent
to being intrinsically of c.e. degree, but the equivalence only held for relations
which are relatively intrinsically d.c.e. (see Proposition 3.5). A relation which is
not intrinsically ∆0
2 cannot be intrinsically of c.e. degree. We ask:
Question 6.1. Which intrinsically ∆0
2 but not relatively intrinsically d.c.e. relations
are intrinsically of c.e. degree?
Also in Chapter 3, we gave an example of two relations with incomparable degree
spectra on a cone, but whose degree spectra are strictly contained within the d.c.e.
degrees and strictly contain the c.e. degrees (see Theorem 1.6, Proposition 3.15, and
Proposition 3.17). We ask whether it is possible to ﬁnd other such degree spectra:
Question 6.2. How many diﬀerent possible degree spectra on a cone are there
strictly containing the c.e. degrees and strictly contained in the d.c.e. degrees? How
are they ordered?
Many of the degree spectra on a cone have a “name,” that is, some sort of
description of degrees which relativizes.
For example, the ∆0
α degrees, the Σ0
α
degrees, α-c.e. degrees, and α-CEA degrees. We do not know of any such description
of the degree spectra from Proposition 3.15 and Proposition 3.17. In general, one
would hope that any degree spectrum on a cone has a nice description of some form.
99


CHAPTER 6. FURTHER QUESTIONS
100
Question 6.3. Is there a good degree-theoretic description of the degree spectra
from Examples 3.13 and 3.14?
In Chapter 4, we show that every relation on (ω,<) which is intrinsically α-c.e.
is intrinsically of c.e. degree (see Propositions 4.13 and 4.14). It might, however, be
possible to have a relation which is intrinsically of α-c.e. degree but not intrinsically
α-c.e.
Question 6.4. Is there a computable relation on the standard copy of (ω,<) which
is not intrinsically of c.e. degree, but is intrinsically of α-c.e. degree for some ﬁxed
ordinal α?
In Theorem 4.19, we show that there is a relation R on (ω,<) such that either
the degree spectrum of R on a cone is strictly contained between the c.e. degrees
and the ∆0
2 degrees, or R has degree spectrum ∆0
2 but not uniformly. It would be
interesting to know if either of these behaviours is possible.
Question 6.5. Is there a relation on (ω,<) whose degree spectrum on a cone is
strictly contained between the c.e. degrees and the ∆0
2 degrees?
Question 6.6. Is there a relation with dgSprel = ∆0
2 but not uniformly? Is there
such a relation on (ω,<)?
In Chapter 5 we proved a “fullness” result by showing that any degree spectra
on a cone which strictly contains the ∆0
2 degrees contains all of the 2-CEA degrees.
Fullness results are very interesting because they show that degree spectra must
contain all of the degrees of a particular type, and hence can provide a good de-
scription of the degree spectrum. Our result for 2-CEA degrees is an answer to a
question of Ash and Knight from [AK95] and [AK97]. The general question, when
stated in our framework, is as follows:
Question 6.7. If a degree spectrum on a cone strictly contains the ∆0
3 degrees,
must it contain the 3-CEA degrees? What about for general α?
Recall that a positive answer to this question implies a positive answer to the
following questions of Montalb´an which ﬁrst appeared in [Wri13]:
Question 6.8 (Montalb´an).
(1) Is it true that for any relation R, for all degrees d on a cone, dgSp(R)≤d has
a maximal element?
(2) Does the function which takes a degree d to the maximal element of dgSp(R)≤d
satisfy Martin’s conjecture?
We also add the question:
(3) Is this function uniformly degree invariant (in the sense of the footnote at the
end of Chapter 2)?


CHAPTER 6. FURTHER QUESTIONS
101
In [Sla05], Slaman deﬁnes a Σ-closure operator to be a map M ∶2ω →22ω such
that:
(1) for all X, X ∈M(X),
(2) for all X and Y,Z ∈M(X), Y ⊕Z ∈M(X),
(3) for all X and Y ∈M(X), if Z ≡T Y then Z ∈M(X),
(4) for all X ≤T Y , M(X) ⊆M(Y ).
Note that for any relation R on a structure A, the map which takes a set X to
dgSp(A,R)≤d (where d is the degree of X) satisﬁes (1), (3), and (4) of this deﬁnition.
Slaman shows:
Theorem 6.9 (Slaman [Sla05, Theorem 5.2]). Let M be a Borel Σ-closure operator.
If, on a cone, M(X) ⊈∆0
2(X), then there is a cone on which M(X) contains all of
the sets which are CEA in X.
One can see this as an analogue of Harizanov’s Theorem 1.2. We ask whether
the degree spectrum on a cone is a Σ-closure operator:
Question 6.10. On a cone, do the degree spectra form an upper semi-lattice under
joins?
In Chapter 2, we deﬁned the alternate degree spectrum
dgSp∗(A,R)≤d = {d(RB) ∶(B,RB) is an isomorphic copy of (A,R) with B ≤T d}
and used this to deﬁne the alternate degree spectrum on a cone, dgSp∗
rel. In Ap-
pendix A, we showed that Harizanov’s Theorem 1.2 on c.e. degrees (in the form of
Corollary 2.7) holds for dgSp∗
rel. The general question is whether anything we can
prove about dgSprel is also true of dgSp∗
rel. More formally:
Question 6.11. Is it always the case that restricting dgSp∗(A,R)≤d to the degrees
above d gives dgSp(A,R)≤d?


Appendix A
Relativizing Harizanov’s
Theorem on C.E. Degrees
Theorem 1.2 had, as a consequence, Corollary 2.7 which said that for any struc-
ture A and relation R, either dgSprel(A,R) = ∆0
1 or dgSprel(A,R) ⊇Σ0
1.
Now
dgSprel(A,R) was deﬁned using the behaviour, on a cone, of the degree spectrum
relativized to a degree d:
dgSp(A,R)≤d = {d(RB)⊕d ∶(B,RB) is an isomorphic copy of (A,R) with B ≤T d}.
In Chapter 2, we brieﬂy considered the alternate deﬁnition
dgSp∗(A,R)≤d = {d(RB) ∶(B,RB) is an isomorphic copy of (A,R) with B ≤T d}
from which one could deﬁne an alternate degree spectrum on a cone, dgSp∗
rel(A,R).
The relativization of Theorem 1.2 does not suﬃce to prove that dgSp∗
rel(A,R) = ∆0
1
or dgSp∗
rel(A,R) ⊇Σ0
1. This is because, as we will see later, the relativization to a
degree d only shows that RB ⊕d ≡T C ⊕d (for C c.e. in d).
Our goal in this appendix is to give a new proof of Theorem 1.2 whose revital-
ization is strong enough to apply to the alternative degree spectrum dgSp∗
rel(A,R).
We will show that it is possible, though the proof is signiﬁcantly more complicated.
The reader may skip this appendix without any impact on their understanding of
the rest of this work. The results in this section are in a similar style, but much
easier, than Theorem 5.1 and hence may be read as an introduction to the proof of
that result.
Theorem A.1. Suppose that A is a computable structure and R is a computable
relation which is not intrinsically computable. Suppose that A satisﬁes the follow-
ing eﬀectiveness condition: the ∃1-diagram of (A,R) is computable, and given a
ﬁnitary existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯x), we can decide whether there are ﬁnitely many
or inﬁnitely many solutions. Then for any sets X ≤T Y with Y c.e. in X, there is
an X-computable copy B of A with
RB ≡T Y
102


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
103
Moreover, Y can compute the isomorphism between A and B.
From this theorem, we get the following corollary:
Corollary A.2. Suppose that A is a structure and R is a relation on A which is not
intrinsically computable on a cone. Then dgSp∗
rel(A,R) contains the c.e. degrees.
Our goal in proving Theorem A.1 is to give evidence towards two ideas. First,
we want to give evidence that results that can be proved for dgSprel can also be
proved for dgSp∗
rel. Second, we will see that if we try to prove results for dgSp∗
rel,
we have to deal with many complications which distract from the heart of the proof.
We will begin by describing Harizanov’s proof of Theorem 1.2. This will both
show us why it does not relativize in the way we desire, and also guide us as to
what we need to do. Let A be a structure and R a computable relation which is
not intrinsically computable, say R is not intrinsically Π0
1. Harizanov’s construction
uses the following deﬁnition from Ash-Nerode [AN81].
Deﬁnition A.3. Let ¯c be a tuple from A. We say that ¯a ∉R is free over ¯c if for
any ﬁnitary existential formula ψ(¯c, ¯x) true of ¯a in A, there is ¯a′ ∈R which also
satisﬁes ψ(¯c, ¯x).
If A is assumed to have an eﬀectiveness condition—namely that for each ¯c in
A and ﬁnitary existential formula ϕ(¯x, ¯c), we can decide whether there is ¯a ∉R
such that A ⊧ϕ(¯a, ¯c)—then for any tuple ¯c, we can eﬀectively ﬁnd a tuple ¯a ∉R
which is free over ¯c. Harizanov uses these free elements to code a c.e. set C into a
computable copy B of A. Building B via a ∆0
2 isomorphism, for each x ∈ω, there
is a tuple from B which codes, by being in R or not in R, whether or not x is in C.
For a given x, she ﬁxes a tuple ¯bx from B and maps it to a tuple ¯a from A which
is free; the fact that ¯a ∉R codes that x ∉C. If, at a later stage, x ∈C, then using
the fact that ¯a is free, she modiﬁes the ∆0
2 isomorphism to instead map ¯b to a tuple
¯a′ ∈R, coding that x ∈C. The argument involves ﬁnite injury. Given RB, one can
compute ¯b0 and decide whether or not 0 ∈C; then, knowing this, we can wait until
a stage at which 0 enters C (if necessary) and can compute ¯b1. We need to wait,
since the choice of ¯b1 may be injured before this stage. Once we know ¯b1, we can
use RB to decide whether or not 1 ∈C, and so on. On the other hand, given C, one
understands the injury from the construction and can compute the isomorphism
between A and B.
Now consider the relativisation to a degree d. Let C be CEA in d and try
to use the same construction (building B computable in d).
Given C, we can
once again run the construction and compute the isomorphism between A and B.
However, given RB, we can not necessarily compute d, and hence do not necessarily
have access to the enumeration of C. Without this, we cannot run through the
construction and compute the coding locations ¯bi. We do, however, get that RB ⊕
d ≡T C.
To prove Theorem A.1, we need a strategy to divorce the coding locations from
the construction of B. The trick we will use is as follows. Fix beforehand tuples
from B to act as coding locations, and number them in increasing order using ω.


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
104
Choose a computable inﬁnite-to-one bijection g ∶ω →2<ω. A coding location may
either be “on” or “oﬀ” depending on whether or not it is in RB (though whether
“on” means in RB and “oﬀ” means out of RB, or vice versa, will depend on the
particular structure and relation). We will show that we make two choices for a
coding location: we can either choose for them to be permanently oﬀno matter what
happens with the other coding locations, or we can choose to have a coding location
start on and later turn oﬀ(after which we not longer have control of the coding
location—if some earlier location turns from on to oﬀ, the later coding location may
turn back on again).
We will ensure that there is a unique increasing sequence k0 < k1 < k2 < ⋯of
coding locations which are “on” such that g(k0) has length one, and g(ki+1) extends
g(ki) by a single element. Thus ⋃i∈ω g(ki) will be a real, and we will ensure that it
is the set C which we are trying to code. We call such a sequence an active sequence.
Since this sequence is unique, we can compute it using RB by looking for the ﬁrst
coding location k0 with g(k0) of length one which is on, then looking for the next
coding location k1 with g(k1) an extension of g(k0) of length two and which is on,
and so on.
We will illustrate how we build the sequence using the following example where
we code whether two elements 0 and 1 are in C. To code that 0 ∉C, start by
choosing a coding location k0 with g(k0) = 0 and have k0 be on. Set every smaller
coding location to be permanently oﬀ. Then, to code that 1 ∉C, ﬁnd a coding
location k1 > k0 with g(k1) = 00 and have k1 be on, while every coding location
between k0 and k1 is oﬀ. Now if 0 enters C, switch k0 oﬀ; k1 might be on, but every
other coding location less than k1 is permanently oﬀ. Because there is no coding
location i < k1 with g(i) of length one and g(i) ≺g(k1), k1 can never be part of
an active sequence even if it is on. Find some k′
0 which has no appeared yet with
g(k′
0) = 1 and set k′
0 to be on, while every coding location between k1 and k′
0 is
permanently oﬀ. Thus k′
0 will be the ﬁrst coding location in the active sequence.
In the remainder of this chapter, we give the proof of Theorem A.1.
A.1
Framework of the Proof
Let A, R, X, and Y be as in the theorem. Note that the eﬀectiveness condition is
robust in the following sense: if Q is deﬁnable from R via both a ﬁnitary existential
formula and a ﬁnitary universal formula, then the eﬀectiveness conditions holds for
Q as well.
The proof of the theorem is by induction on the arity r of R. We will argue that
we can make three assumptions, (I), (II), and (III). Let ⟨A⟩r denote the tuples in
Ar with no duplicate entries and let Ar
i=j denote the set of tuples from Ar with ith
entry equal to the jth entry. Note that ⟨A⟩r and Ar
i=j are deﬁned by both ﬁnitary
existential and universal formulas. If the restriction R ∩Ar
i=j of R to some Ar
i=j
is not intrinsically computable, then as the restriction is essentially an (r −1)-ary
relation, by the induction hypothesis, there is an X-computable copy B of A with
RB ∩Br
i=j ≡T Y . Now the set Y computes the isomorphism between A and B, and


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
105
since R is computable in A, Y computes RB. Also, RB ∩Br
i=j ≤T RB and hence
RB ≡T Y and we are done. So we may assume that the restrictions R ∩Ar
i=j are
intrinsically computable and hence are deﬁned by ﬁnitary existential and universal
formulas. Since
R = (R ∩⟨A⟩r) ∪⋃
i≠j
(R ∩Ar
i=j)
and R ∩⟨A⟩r is disjoint from ⋃i≠j(R ∩Ar
i=j), we must have that R ∩⟨A⟩r is not
intrinsically computable. So we may replace R by R∩⟨A⟩r. This is assumption (I):
that R ⊆⟨A⟩r. When we say ¯a ∈R or ¯a ∉R, we really mean that ¯a ∈⟨A⟩r as well.
An important aspect of the proof will be whether we can ﬁnd “large” formally
Σ0
1 sets contained in R or its complement. Let us formally deﬁne what we mean
by large. We say that two tuples ¯a = (a1,... ,an) and ¯b = (b1,... ,bn) are disjoint if
they do not share any entries, that is, ai ≠bj for each i and j. We say that a set
S ⊆An is thick if it contains an inﬁnite set of pairwise disjoint tuples; otherwise,
we say that S is thin.
Lemma A.4. If S ⊆Ak is a thin set, there is a bound on the size of sets of pairwise
disjoint tuples from S.
Proof. Suppose that there is no such bound. We claim that S is thick. Let ¯a1,... , ¯an
be a maximal pairwise disjoint subset of S. Since there is no bound on the size of
sets of pairwise disjoint tuples form S, we can pick ¯b1,... ,¯bn⋅k+1 all pairwise disjoint.
There are k ⋅n distinct entries that appear in ¯a1,... , ¯an; since each entry can only
appear in a single ¯bi, some ¯bi must be disjoint from each ¯aj. This contradicts the
maximality of ¯a1,... , ¯an.
We’ll argue that we may assume that R is thick. Suppose that R is not thick.
Then there are ﬁnitely many tuples ¯a1,... , ¯an such that no more elements of R
are disjoint from ¯a1,... , ¯an. Write ¯ai = (a1
i ,... ,ar
i ). Let Ri,j,k be the set of tuples
¯b = (b1,... ,bn) in R with bj = ak
i . Then
R = ⋃
i,j,k
Ri,j,k.
Then one of the Ri,j,k is not intrinsically computable, or else R would be intrinsically
computable. But Ri,j,k is essentially an (r −1)-ary relation and Ri,j,k ≤T R. So we
can use the induction hypothesis as above to reduce to the case where R and ¬R
are both thick. This is assumption (II).
Let ¯c be any tuple.
By a similar argument as above, we may assume that
R, when restricted to tuples not disjoint from ¯c, is intrinsically computable, and
that R restricted to tuples disjoint from ¯c is not intrinsically computable. This is
assumption (III).
Now we have three cases to consider.
(1) R is not intrinsically Π0
1, but R contains a thick set deﬁned by a Σc
1 formula.
(2) R is not intrinsically Σ0
1, but ¬R contains a thick deﬁned by a Σc
1 formula.


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
106
(3) Neither R nor ¬R contains a thick set deﬁned by a Σc
1 formula.
These exhaust all of the possibilities. If we are not in the third case, then either
R or ¬R must contain a thick set deﬁned by a Σc
1 formula. If neither R nor ¬R
are deﬁnable by a Σc
1 formula, then we must be one of the ﬁrst two cases. Finally,
it is possible that R is deﬁnable by a Πc
1 or Σc
1 formula. In the ﬁrst case, R is not
deﬁnable by a Σc
1 formula, but ¬R is (and, as ¬R is thick, (2) holds). In the second
case, R is deﬁnable by a Σc
1 formula, but not by any Πc
1 formula, and so (1) holds.
Note that cases one and two include the particular cases where R is intrinsically
Σ0
1 but not intrinsically Π0
1 and intrinsically Π0
1 but not intrinsically Σ0
1 respectively.
A.2
The First Two Cases
The second case is similar to the ﬁrst, but with R replaced by ¬R. We will just
consider the ﬁrst case.
We assume that R satisﬁes (I), (II), and (III). Now we have the following lemma
which applies to R (since our eﬀectiveness condition is strong enough to imply the
condition in the lemma, as well as to ﬁnd the free elements from the lemma).
Lemma A.5 (Ash-Nerode [AN81]). Suppose that R is not deﬁned in A by Πc
1
formula. Furthermore, suppose that for each tuple ¯c in A and ﬁnitary existential
formula ϕ(¯c,x), we can decide whether there exists ¯a ∉R such that A ⊧ϕ(¯a, ¯c).
Then for each tuple ¯c ∈A, there is ¯a ∉R disjoint from ¯c and free over ¯c.
Let ¯c be a tuple from A. We say that ¯a ∈⟨A⟩r is constrained over ¯c if there is a
ﬁnitary existential formula ψ(¯c, ¯x) true of ¯a in A such that for any ¯a′ ∈⟨A⟩r which
also satisﬁes ψ(¯c, ¯x), ¯a′ ∈R if and only if ¯a ∈R.
Let ¯d be a tuple in A and ϕ( ¯d, ¯x) a Σc
1 formula deﬁning a thick subset of R.
Now there are inﬁnitely many disjoint tuples ¯b ∈⟨A⟩r satisfying ϕ( ¯d, ¯x) and hence
in R. Each of these tuples satisﬁes a ﬁnitary existential formula which is a disjunct
in ϕ( ¯d, ¯x), and hence is constrained over ¯d. We may ﬁnd such tuples computably.
The following proposition completes the theorem in the ﬁrst case.
Proposition A.6. Suppose that there is a tuple ¯d such that for any ¯c ⊇¯d, we can
compute new elements ¯a ∉R and ¯b ∈R disjoint from ¯c such that ¯a is free over ¯c
and ¯b is constrained over ¯d. Then for any sets X ≤T Y with Y c.e. in X there
is an X-computable copy B of A with RB ≡T Y . Moreover, Y can compute the
isomorphism between A and B.
Proof. We may assume that the constants ¯d are part of the language, and hence
ignore them.
Let ¯c be a tuple. Suppose that a ∉R is free over ¯c, and ¯b1,... ,¯bm ∈R are con-
strained, and ¯e any elements. Let ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v1,... , ¯vm, ¯w) be a quantiﬁer-free formula
true of ¯a,¯b1,... ,¯bm, ¯e. We claim that there is ¯a′ ∈R, ¯b′
1,... ,¯b′
m ∈R constrained,
and ¯e such that A ⊧ϕ(¯c, ¯a′,¯b′
1,... ,¯b′
m, ¯e′).
For i = 1,... ,m choose ψi( ¯d, ¯vi) an
existential formula true of ¯bi in A such that for any ¯b′
i ∈A which also satisﬁes ψi,


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
107
¯b′
i ∈R; note that any such ¯b′
i is also constrained over ¯d since it satisﬁes ψi. Then
consider the existential formula
φ(¯c,u) = ∃¯v1,... , ¯vm, ¯w(ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v1,... , ¯vm, ¯w) ∧
⋀
i=1,...,m
ψi( ¯d, ¯vi))
Since ¯a is free over ¯c, there is ¯a′ ∈R with A ⊧φ(¯c, ¯a′). Then let ¯b′
1,... ,¯b′
m ∈R and
¯e be the witnesses to the existential quantiﬁer. These are the desired elements.
Let Ys be the enumeration of Y relative to X. Using X we will construct by
stages a copy B of A with RB ≡T Y . Let B be an inﬁnite set of constants disjoint
from A. We will construct a bijection F ∶B →A and use F −1 to deﬁne the structure
B on B. At each stage, we will give a tentative ﬁnite part of the isomorphism F.
It will be convenient to view B as a list of r-tuples B = {¯b0,¯b1,...}.
Fix a computable inﬁnite-to-one bijection g ∶ω →2<ω ∪{∅}. We will code Y
into RB in the following way. We will ensure that if k1 < ⋯< kn are such that
¯bk1,... ,¯bkn ∉RB and ∣g(ki)∣= i and g(k1) ≺g(k2) ≺⋯≺g(kn) then g(kn) ≺
Y . Moreover, we will ensure that there is an inﬁnite sequence k1,k2,... with this
property. Thus RB will be able to compute Y by reconstructing such a sequence.
On the other hand, since Y will be able to compute the isomorphism, it will be
able to compute RB. Note that the empty string ∅has length zero, so it can never
appear in such a sequence, and thus marks a position that never does any coding.
We will promise that if at some stage we are mapping some tuple ¯b ∈B to a
constrained tuple in R, ¯b will be mapped to a constrained tuple of R at every later
stage.
At a stage s + 1, let Fs ∶{¯b0,... ,¯bℓ} →A be the partial isomorphism determined
in the previous stage, and let Bs be the ﬁnite part of the diagram of B which has
been determined so far. We will also have numbers i1,s,... ,ins,s with i1,s < ⋯< ins,s
which indicate tuples ¯bik,s. For each k, g(ik,s) will code a string of length k. We
are trying to ensure that if g(ik,s) ≺Yt for every stage t ≥s, then we keep ¯bik,s ∉RB,
and otherwise we put ¯bik,s ∈RB. Once the ﬁrst k entries of Y have stabilized, ik,s
will stabilize.
We deﬁne a partial isomorphism G extending Fs which, potentially with some
corrections, will be Fs+1. Let G(¯bi) = Fs(¯bi) for 0 ≤i ≤ℓ. We may assume, by
extending G by adding constrained tuples, that g(ℓ+ 1) = ∅.
Let ¯aℓ+1 be the
ﬁrst r new elements not yet in the image of Fs. Now let k > ℓbe ﬁrst such that
g(k) = Ys+1 ↾ns+1. Find new tuples ¯aℓ+2,... , ¯ak ∈R which are constrained. Also
Find ¯ak+1 ∈¬R which is free over G(¯b0),... ,G(¯bℓ), ¯aℓ+1,... , ¯ak. Set G(¯bi) = ¯ai for
ℓ+ 1 ≤i ≤k.
Let Bs+1 ⊇Bs be the atomic formulas of G¨odel number at most s which are true
of the images of ¯b0,... ,¯bk in A.
Now we will act to ensure that for each m, g(im,s+1) ≺Ys+1. Find the ﬁrst m, if
any exists, such that g(im,s) ⊀Ys+1. If such an m exists, using the fact that g(im,s)
is free over the previous elements, choose ¯a′
m,... , ¯a′
k such that:
(1) G(¯b0),... ,G(¯bm−1), ¯a′
m,... , ¯a′
k satisfy the same existential formula that ¯b0,... ,¯bk
does in Bs+1,


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
108
(2) for any m′ > m such that ¯am′ ∈R is constrained, so is ¯a′
m′ ∈R, and
(3) ¯a′
im,s ∈R.
Set Fs+1(¯bj) = G(¯bj) for j < m and Fs+1(¯bj) = ¯a′
j for m + 1 ≤j ≤k.
Also set
ns+1 = m −1 and i0,s+1 = i0,s,... ,im−1,s+1 = im−1,s.
On the other hand, if no such m exists, set Fs+1 = G, set ns+1 = ns +1, ins+1,s+1 =
k, and ij,s+1 = ij,s for 0 ≤j ≤ns.
This completes the construction. It is a standard ﬁnite-injury construction and
it is easy to verify that the construction works as desired.
A.3
The Third Case
We may suppose that, for each n and restricting to tuples in ⟨A⟩rn, there is no
thick subset of Ri1 × ⋯× Rin where i1,... ,in ∈{−1,1} (or the complement of such
a set) deﬁnable by a Σc
1 formula. Moreover, we may assume that the same is true
for particular ﬁbers of such a set; we may assume that for any ¯c2,... , ¯cn, the ﬁber
S = {(¯x, ¯y2,... , ¯yn)∣¯x ∈Ri1, ¯yj¯cj ∈Rij}
has no thick subset. If there was a thick subset, then since R is not deﬁnable by any
Σc
1 or Πc
1 formula, S is not deﬁnable by any Σc
1 or Πc
1 formula (if it was deﬁnable in
such a way, then as either R or its complement is a projection of S onto the initial
coordinates, R would be deﬁnable by either a Σc
1 or Πc
1 formula as well). Since we
considered only tuples of Arn with no repeated entries, S satisﬁes assumption (I).
As R and ¬R are thick by assumption (II), S and ¬S are also thick. Moreover, the
restriction of S to those tuples which are disjoint from some particular tuple ¯c is not
intrinsically computable as the restriction of R is not. So S satisﬁes assumptions
(I), (II), and (III), and falls under either case one or case two. Note that we are
not using the induction hypothesis here (and indeed it does not apply since S is
possibly of higher arity than R) because S is already understood as a relation on
tuples with no repeated entries satisfying the assumptions, so we can appeal directly
to Proposition A.6. Thus we may make the assumption that each such set S has
no thick subset.
Now the remainder of the proof is an analysis of the deﬁnable sets in order to
run the construction in the previous case even without constrained elements.
Lemma A.7. Let ¯c be a tuple. Suppose that every tuple ¯a ∈⟨A⟩r satisﬁes some
ﬁnitary existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯u) with ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩r) = {¯b ∈⟨A⟩r ∶A ⊧ϕ(¯c,¯b)} thin.
Then there is a tuple ¯d over which every ¯a ∈⟨A⟩r satisﬁes a ﬁnitary existential
formula with only ﬁnitely many solutions.
First, we need another lemma.
Lemma A.8. If ϕ(¯c,u) is a ﬁnitary existential formula such that S = ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n) is
a thin set, and ¯a ∈S where ¯a = (a1,... ,an), then for some i, ai satisﬁes a ﬁnitary
existential formula over ¯c with ﬁnitely many solutions.


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
109
Proof. The proof is by induction on n. For n = 1, a thin set is just a ﬁnite set and
the result is clear. Now suppose that we know the result for n. Let ϕ(¯c, ¯u) be a
ﬁnitary existential formula with ∣¯u∣= n + 1, and suppose that ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n+1) is thin.
Let k be maximal such that there are k pairwise disjoint tuples satisfying ϕ(¯c, ¯u).
Write ¯u = ¯v,w with ∣¯v∣= n.
If ∃¯vϕ(¯c, ¯v,A) is ﬁnite (including the case where ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n+1) is ﬁnite) then we
are done. If the set of solutions of ∃wϕ(¯c, ¯v,w) is thin, then we are done by the
induction hypothesis.
We claim that there are only ﬁnitely many (in fact at most k) elements d
with ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n,d) containing n ⋅k + 1 or more disjoint tuples. If not, then choose
d1,... ,dk+1 distinct. Then, for d1, choose ¯e1 satisfying ϕ(¯c, ¯v,d1). Now d2 has at
least n + 1 disjoint tuples satisfying ϕ(¯c, ¯v,d2), so it must have some tuple disjoint
from ¯e1.
Continuing in this way, we contradict the choice of k by constructing
k + 1 disjoint solutions di¯ei of ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v). So there are ﬁnitely many d such that
ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n,d) contains n⋅k +1 or more disjoint tuples, and the set of such d is deﬁn-
able by an existential formula. If for our given tuple ¯a, an+1 is one of these d, then
we are done.
Otherwise, since the set is ﬁnite, say there are exactly m such d, the set of
¯v,w with ϕ(¯c, ¯v,w) and w not one of these d is also existentially deﬁnable and
thin.
Add to ϕ(¯c, ¯v,w) the existential formula which says that there d1,... ,dm
with ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n,di) containing n ⋅k + 1 or more disjoint tuples, and that w is not
one of the di.
So we may assume that for all d, ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n,d) contains at most
n ⋅k many disjoint tuples and that the set ∃wϕ(¯c, ¯v,w) is not thin. Choose ¯e1,d1
satisfying ϕ(¯c, ¯v,w). Choose ¯f1,... , ¯fn⋅k pairwise disjoint from each other and also
disjoint from ¯e1, and g1,... ,gn⋅k with ¯fi,gi satisfying ϕ.
Then we cannot have
g1 = ⋯= gn⋅k = d1, so we can choose ¯e2,d2 pairwise disjoint and disjoint from from
¯e1,d1. Now choose ¯f1,... , ¯f2n⋅k disjoint from ¯e1, ¯e2, and g1,... ,g2n⋅k. Then some gi
must be distinct from d1 and d2. Continue in this way; we contradict the fact that
ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩n+1) is thin. This exhausts the possibilities.
We return to the proof of Lemma A.7.
Proof of Lemma A.7. There must be fewer than r elements of A which do not
satisfy some existential formula over ¯c with ﬁnitely many solutions. If not, then
there are a1,... ,ar ∈A that are not contained in any such existential formula. Let
ϕ(¯c, ¯u) deﬁne a thin set containing (a1,... ,ar); then by the previous lemma one of
a1,... ,ar must be contained in some existential formula over ¯c with ﬁnitely many
solutions.
Let ¯d be ¯c together with these ﬁnitely many exceptions.
Then every tuple
¯a ∈⟨A⟩r satisﬁes some existential formula ϕ( ¯d, ¯u) with ϕ( ¯d,⟨A⟩) ﬁnite.
Lemma A.9. For each tuple ¯c, there is a tuple ¯a such that the set of solutions of
each existential formula over ¯c satisﬁed by ¯a is thick.
Proof. Suppose not. Then Lemma A.7 applies. For each ¯a ∈⟨A⟩m, let ϕ¯a be such
that ϕ¯a( ¯d,⟨A⟩m) is ﬁnite and as small as possible and contains ¯a. Suppose that


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
110
¯b ∈⟨A⟩m and A ⊧ϕ¯a( ¯d,¯b). Also suppose that A ⊧ψ( ¯d,¯b) but A ⊭ψ( ¯d, ¯a) where ψ
is existential. Let n = ∣ϕ¯a( ¯d,⟨A⟩m) ∩ψ( ¯d,⟨A⟩m)∣. Then
A ⊧ϕ¯a( ¯d, ¯a) ∧∃≥n¯u(ϕ¯a( ¯d, ¯u) ∧ψ( ¯d, ¯u) ∧¯u ≠¯a)
but this formula has fewer solutions than ϕ( ¯d, ¯x) since ¯b is not a solution. So every
tuple ¯a in ⟨A⟩m has some existential formula ϕ¯a it satisﬁes over ¯d, with the property
that each pair of tuples satisfying ϕ¯a satisfy all the same existential formulas. By
Proposition 6.10 of [AK00], Φ = {ϕ¯a ∶¯a ∈⟨A⟩m,m ∈ω} is a Scott family.
In
particular, ϕ¯a( ¯d,⟨A⟩r) ⊆R or ϕ¯a( ¯d,⟨A⟩r) ⊆¬R for each ¯a ∈⟨A⟩r, and so R is
deﬁned by both a Σc
1 formula and a Πc
1 formula. This is a contradiction.
Corollary A.10. For each tuple ¯c, there is a tuple ¯a ∈⟨A⟩r such that the set of
solutions of each existential formula over ¯c satisﬁed by ¯a is thick. Also, ¯a is free
over ¯c.
Proof. Let ¯c be a tuple. We know that there is some ¯a1 such that every existential
formula over ¯c satisﬁed by ¯a1 is thick. If ∣¯a1∣≥r, then we can just truncate ¯a1.
Otherwise, if ∣¯a1∣< r, we can ﬁnd ¯a2 such that every existential formula over ¯c¯a1
satisﬁed by ¯a2 is thick. Let ϕ(¯c, ¯x, ¯y) be an existential formula satisﬁed by ¯a1, ¯a2.
We claim that the set of solutions of ϕ is thick. Suppose not, and say that there
are at most k disjoint solutions. Now the solution set of ϕ(¯c, ¯a1, ¯y) is thick, so there
is an existential formula ψ(¯c, ¯x) true of ¯a1 over ¯c which says that there are at least
(k + 1) ⋅(∣¯a1∣+ ∣¯a2∣) + 1 disjoint solutions ¯y to ϕ(¯c, ¯x, ¯y). Then the solution set of
ψ(¯c, ¯x) is thick, so we can choose k + 1 disjoint solutions ¯b1,... ,¯bk+1. Then choose
¯d1 a solution to ϕ(¯c,¯b1, ¯y). Now there are 2∣¯a1∣+ ∣¯a2∣entries in ¯b1 ¯d1, so one of the
(k +1)⋅(∣¯a1∣+∣¯a2∣)+1 solutions to ϕ(¯c,¯b2, ¯y) is disjoint from ¯b1, ¯d1, and ¯b2. We can
pick some such solution ¯d2. Continuing in this way, we get k + 1 disjoint solutions
¯b1 ¯d1,... ,¯bk+1, ¯dk+1 to ϕ(¯c, ¯x, ¯y), a contradiction.
Now let ¯a ∈⟨A⟩r be such that every existential formula over ¯c satisﬁed by ¯a is
thick. If ¯a is not free over ¯c, then there is some existential formula ϕ¯a(¯c, ¯x) true of
¯a and not true of any ¯a′ ∉R. Then ϕ(¯c,⟨A⟩r) is a Σ0
1-deﬁnable subset of R, and
hence thin, a contradiction.
We also want another pair of corollaries of the above lemma.
Corollary A.11. Let S be any existentially deﬁned set, and ¯a ∈S. Then there
is an existentially deﬁned S′ ⊆S containing ¯a and ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) deﬁning S′ such that
∃¯uϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) is thick and ∃¯vϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) is ﬁnite.
Proof. Let ¯a = ¯a′¯a′′ where ¯a′ is contained in some ﬁnite existentially deﬁnable set
over ¯c, and no entry of ¯a′′ is. Let ψ(¯c, ¯u) be a deﬁning formula of this ﬁnite set, and
let χ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) deﬁne S. Let S′ be the set of solutions to χ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) ∧ψ(¯c, ¯u). Then
by Lemma A.8 since no entry of ¯a′′ is in a ﬁnite existentially deﬁnable set over ¯c,
∃¯u(χ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) ∧ψ(¯c, ¯u)) is thick.


APPENDIX A. RELATIVIZING HARIZANOV’S THEOREM
111
Corollary A.12. Let S be any existentially deﬁned set, and ¯a ∈S.
Then we
can write ¯a = ¯a′¯a′′ where ¯a′ is in an existential formula over ¯c with ﬁnitely many
solutions and there is an existential formula ϕ(¯c, ¯a′, ¯u) which is thick and contains
¯a′′.
Proof. Let ¯a = ¯a′¯a′′ be as in the previous corollary, and let χ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) deﬁne S. Now,
let ψ(¯c, ¯u) be the formula deﬁning the ﬁnite set containing ¯a′; we may choose ψ
so that every solution has the same existential type over ¯c by the argument on the
previous page. Since ∃¯u(χ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v) ∧ψ(¯c, ¯u)) is thick, and is the union of χ(¯c,¯b, ¯v)
for each ¯b satisfying ψ(¯c, ¯u), χ(¯c,¯b, ¯v) is thick for some ¯b. This is witnessed by
(a family of) existential formulas about ¯b saying that there are arbitrarily many
disjoint solutions to χ(¯c,¯b, ¯v). But all such formulas are true of each other solution
of ψ(¯c, ¯u), and in particular of ¯a′. So χ(¯c, ¯a′, ¯v) is thick.
Lemma A.13. Let ¯c be a tuple, and ¯a,¯b1,... ,¯bn ∈⟨A⟩, and ¯a is contained in no
thin set over ¯c. Let ϕ(¯c, ¯u, ¯v1,... , ¯vn) be an existential formula true of ¯a,¯b1,... ,¯bn.
Then there are ¯a′, ¯d1,... , ¯dn satisfying ϕ with ¯a′ ∈R ⇔¯a ∉R and ¯di ∈R ⇔¯bi ∈R.
Proof. Using the above lemma, for each i write ¯bi = ¯b′
i¯b′′
i be contained in ﬁnite
deﬁnable sets over ¯c with ϕ(¯c, ¯u,¯b′
1, ¯v1,... ,¯b′
n, ¯vn) deﬁning a thick set. Note that
¯a is not contained in any thin set over ¯c, and in particular, none of its entries are
in any ﬁnite existentially deﬁnable sets over ¯c. Using the fact that R × S (where S
is a ﬁber over some tuple of a product of R and ¬R) has no thick subset, we can
choose ¯d′
i = ¯b′
i for 1 ≤i ≤m and choose ¯a′ and ¯d = ¯d′
i ¯d′′
i to satisfy ¯a′ ∈R ⇔¯a ∉R and
¯di ∈R ⇔¯bi ∈R.
These lemmas are exactly what is required for the construction in Proposition
A.6. Instead of choosing elements which are free, we choose elements which are not
contained in any thin set, and use the above lemma to move them into R while
keeping later elements from R in R. We need to know that we can eﬀectively ﬁnd
such elements. We can do this using the eﬀectiveness condition and Lemma A.8.


Bibliography
[AK95]
C. Ash and J. Knight, Possible degrees in recursive copies, Ann. Pure
Appl. Logic 75 (1995), no. 3, 215–221. MR 1355133 (96j:03058)
[AK96]
, Recursive structures and Ershov’s hierarchy, Math. Logic
Quart. 42 (1996), no. 4, 461–468. MR 1417841 (98g:03090)
[AK97]
, Possible degrees in recursive copies. II, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic
87 (1997), no. 2, 151–165, Logic Colloquium ’95 Haifa. MR 1490052
(99b:03060)
[AK00]
, Computable structures and the hyperarithmetical hierarchy,
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 144, North-
Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 2000. MR 1767842 (2001k:03090)
[AKMS89] C. Ash, J. Knight, M. Manasse, and T. Slaman, Generic copies of
countable structures, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 42 (1989), no. 3, 195–205.
MR 998606 (90d:03065)
[AN81]
C. Ash and A. Nerode, Intrinsically recursive relations, Aspects of ef-
fective algebra (Clayton, 1979), Upside Down A Book Co. Yarra Glen,
Vic., 1981, pp. 26–41. MR 629248 (83a:03039)
[Bar88]
E. Barker, Intrinsically Σ0
α relations, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 39 (1988),
no. 2, 105–130. MR 955520 (89i:03087)
[Chi90]
J. Chisholm, Eﬀective model theory vs. recursive model theory, J. Sym-
bolic Logic 55 (1990), no. 3, 1168–1191. MR 1071322 (91i:03072)
[DKMY09] R. Downey, B. Khoussianov, J. Miller, and L. Yu, Degree spectra of
unary relations on (ω,<), proceedings of the International Congress in
Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, Beijing, 2007 (2009),
36–55.
[EHK81]
R. Epstein, R. Haas, and R. Kramer, Hierarchies of sets and degrees
below 0′, Logic Year 1979–80 (Proc. Seminars and Conf. Math. Logic,
Univ. Connecticut, Storrs, Conn., 1979/80), Lecture Notes in Math.,
vol. 859, Springer, Berlin, 1981, pp. 32–48. MR 619859 (82k:03073)
112


BIBLIOGRAPHY
113
[Erˇs68a]
Y. Erˇsov, A certain hierarchy of sets. I, Algebra i Logika 7 (1968), no. 1,
47–74. MR 0270911 (42 #5794)
[Erˇs68b]
, A certain hierarchy of sets. II, Algebra i Logika 7 (1968), no. 4,
15–47. MR 0270912 (42 #5795)
[Erˇs70]
, A certain hierarchy of sets. III, Algebra i Logika 9 (1970),
34–51. MR 0299478 (45 #8526)
[GK97]
S. Goncharov and B. Khusainov, On the spectrum of the degrees of
decidable relations, Dokl. Akad. Nauk 352 (1997), no. 3, 301–303. MR
1445858 (98b:03062)
[GS53]
D. Gale and F. Stewart, Inﬁnite games with perfect information, Contri-
butions to the theory of games, vol. 2, Annals of Mathematics Studies,
no. 28, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N. J., 1953, pp. 245–266.
MR 0054922 (14,999b)
[Har87]
V. Harizanov, Degree spectrum of a recursive relation on a recursive
structure, ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 1987, Thesis (Ph.D.)–The
University of Wisconsin - Madison. MR 2635809
[Har91]
, Some eﬀects of Ash-Nerode and other decidability conditions
on degree spectra, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 55 (1991), no. 1, 51–65. MR
1134916 (93b:03055)
[Har93]
, The possible turing degree of the nonzero member in a two
element degree spectrum, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 60 (1993),
no. 1, 1 – 30.
[Hir00]
D. Hirschfeldt,
Degree spectra of relations on computable struc-
tures, Bull. Symbolic Logic 6 (2000), no. 2, 197–212. MR 1781623
(2002d:03063)
[Jec03]
T. Jech, Set theory, Springer Monographs in Mathematics, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, 2003, The third millennium edition, revised and ex-
panded. MR 1940513 (2004g:03071)
[Kni86]
J. Knight, Degrees coded in jumps of orderings, J. Symbolic Logic 51
(1986), no. 4, 1034–1042. MR 865929 (88j:03030)
[Kni98]
, Coding a family of sets, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 94 (1998),
no. 1-3, 127–142, Conference on Computability Theory (Oberwolfach,
1996). MR 1640266 (99f:03061)
[Kno09]
C. Knoll, Degree spectra of unary relations on ω and ζ, Master’s thesis,
University of Waterloo, 2009.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
114
[Kru72]
J. Kruskal, The theory of well-quasi-ordering:
A frequently discov-
ered concept, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. A 13 (1972), 297–305. MR
0306057 (46 #5184)
[KS98]
B. Khoussainov and R. Shore, Computable isomorphisms, degree spectra
of relations, and Scott families, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 93 (1998), no. 1-
3, 153–193, Computability theory. MR 1635605 (99g:03046)
[Mar68]
D. Martin, The axiom of determinateness and reduction principles in
the analytical hierarchy, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 74 (1968), 687–689.
MR 0227022 (37 #2607)
[Mar75]
, Borel determinacy, Ann. of Math. (2) 102 (1975), no. 2, 363–
371. MR 0403976 (53 #7785)
[McC02]
C. McCoy, On ∆0
3-categoricity for linear orders and Boolean alge-
bras, Algebra Logika 41 (2002), no. 5, 531–552, 633. MR 1953178
(2003k:03050)
[McN00]
T. McNicholl, Intrinsic reducibilities, MLQ Math. Log. Q. 46 (2000),
no. 3, 393–407. MR 1774681 (2001f:03078)
[Mon09]
A. Montalb´an, Notes on the jump of a structure, Mathematical theory
and computational practice, Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., vol. 5635,
Springer, Berlin, 2009, pp. 372–378. MR 2545911 (2011h:03059)
[Sco65]
D. Scott, Logic with denumerably long formulas and ﬁnite strings of
quantiﬁers, Theory of Models (Proc. 1963 Internat. Sympos. Berkeley),
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965, pp. 329–341. MR 0200133 (34 #32)
[Sla05]
T. Slaman, Aspects of the Turing jump, Logic Colloquium 2000, Lect.
Notes Log., vol. 19, Assoc. Symbol. Logic, Urbana, IL, 2005, pp. 365–
382. MR 2143887 (2006b:03049)
[SS88]
T. Slaman and J. Steel, Deﬁnable functions on degrees, Cabal Seminar
81–85, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1333, Springer, Berlin, 1988, pp. 37–
55. MR 960895 (89m:03033)
[Ste82]
J. Steel, A classiﬁcation of jump operators, J. Symbolic Logic 47 (1982),
no. 2, 347–358. MR 654792 (84i:03085)
[Wri13]
M. Wright, Computability and structures, ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor,
MI, 2013, Thesis (Ph.D.)–The University of Chicago. MR 3167353
