arXiv:2011.03923v1  [math.LO]  8 Nov 2020
An Introduction to the Scott Complexity of Countable
Structures and a Survey of Recent Results
Matthew Harrison-Trainor
November 10, 2020
Abstract
Every countable structure has a sentence of the inﬁnitary logic Lω1ω which charac-
terizes that structure up to isomorphism among countable structures. Such a sentence
is called a Scott sentence, and can be thought of as a description of the structure. The
least complexity of a Scott sentence for a structure can be thought of as a measure-
ment of the complexity of describing the structure. We begin with an introduction to
the area, with short and simple proofs where possible, followed by a survey of recent
advances.
1
Introduction
A central feature of elementary ﬁrst-order logic is the compactness theorem, which has
as a consequence the Ryll-Nardzewski theorem that any countably-categorical structure is
relatively simple: for each n, there are only ﬁnitely many automorphism orbits of n-tuples. So
most structures are not countably categorical, which means that no matter which elementary
ﬁrst-order sentences we write down, we cannot completely characterize the structure up to
isomorphism.
If we strengthen our language, Scott [Sco65] showed that we can characterize every count-
able structure up to isomorphism. The required strengthening of the language allows count-
ably inﬁnite conjunctions and disjunctions, so that for example we can express that an
abelian group is torsion by saying that for each element x, either x = 0, or x + x = 0, or
x + x + x = 0, and so on. More formally, we use the logic Lω1ω which is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 1.1. Let τ be a vocabulary. The formulas of the logic Lω1ω(τ) are built induc-
tively as follows:
• terms and atomic formulas are deﬁned as in elementary ﬁrst-order logic;
• if ϕ is a formula, so is ¬ϕ;
• if ¯x is a ﬁnite tuple of variables and X is a countable set of formulas such that for
each ϕ ∈X, the free variables of ϕ are contained within ¯x, then ⩕ϕ∈X ϕ and ⩔ϕ∈X ϕ
are formulas;
1


• if ϕ is a formula, then so are ∀xϕ and ∃xϕ.
Lω1ω does not satisfy compactness, but it does satisfy downward (though not upward)
Lowenheim-Skolem for countable fragments. The book by Marker [Mar16] is an excellent
reference on inﬁnitary model theory.
Now that we have strengthened our language, it is possible to show that each structure
is characterized up to isomorphism among countable structures by a sentence of this logic
[Sco65]. We call this sentence a Scott sentence.
Deﬁnition 1.2. Let A be a countable structure. A Scott sentence for A is a sentence ϕ of
Lω1ω such that, up to isomorphism, A is the only countably model of ϕ.
The standard proof that every countable structure has a Scott sentence passes through the
back-and-forth relations, showing that they must stabilize at some countable ordinal, and
then extracting from this a Scott sentence. This Scott analysis of a structure has played an
important role in the study of Vaught’s conjecture, e.g. in Morley’s theorem [Mor70] that
the number of non-isomorphic countable models of a theory is either at most ℵ1 or is exactly
2ℵ0. There are excellent references for these results on Vaught’s conjecture, e.g. in Marker’s
book [Mar16], and so we will only touch on them brieﬂy.
Fixing a countable structure A, there is a some countable ordinal at which the back-
and-forth relations stabilize.
This introduces a way of assigning an ordinal to A, called
its Scott rank. There are several slightly diﬀerent variations of what it means to stabilize,
leading to several diﬀerent deﬁnitions of Scott rank.
The Scott rank can be thought of
equivalently as measuring both the complexity of the automorphism orbits of the structure
and the complexity of describing the structure.
Another way of measuring the complexity of A is the least complexity of a Scott sentence
for A. To measure the complexity of Lω1ω formulas, we use the natural hierarchy of Σα and
Πα sentences in normal form.
• An Lω1ω formula is both Σ0 and Π0 if it is quantiﬁer free and does not contain any
inﬁnite disjunction or conjunction.
• An Lω1ω formula is Σα if it is a countable disjunction of formulas of the form ∃xφ where
each φ is Πβ for some β < α.
• An Lω1ω formula is Πα if it is a countable disjunction of formulas of the form ∀xφ
where each φ is Σβ for some β < α.
This approach led Montalb´an [Mon15] to deﬁne a new notion of Scott rank as the least
ordinal α for which A has a Πα+1 Scott sentence. He proved that this is robust in the sense
that there are a number of diﬀerent equivalent characterizations, including the complexity
of deﬁning automorphism orbits, and the complexity of computing isomorphisms between
diﬀerent copies of A.
An even ﬁner measurement, the Scott complexity of A, is the least complexity of a Scott
sentence for A.
Alvir, Greenberg, Harrison-Trainor, and Turetsky [AGHTT] argued by
means of the Wadge degrees that the only (reasonable) possible complexities are Σα, Πα,
and d−Σα.
2


This article will begin with a more detailed look at the above background material. Fol-
lowing this, we will touch on more specialized areas. We begin with eﬀective considerations
and structures of high Scott rank. Here we give new elementary proofs, avoiding Barwise
compactness and Σ1
1 bounding, which we think are simpler than many of those in the liter-
ature. Next, we look at results on the Scott complexity of particular structures of interest
in mathematics, e.g. free groups. Finally, we discuss theories, including a brief summary of
connections with Vaught’s conjecture.
We also note that there is a work applying the Scott analysis to separable metric spaces,
which we will not cover in this survey. See [MN13, Dou14, BYDNT17, CC20, Cha]; note
that [Dou14] has an erratum [Dou17].
2
Scott Sentences and Scott Rank
Our ﬁrst step is to see why every structure has a Scott sentence.
The standard way to
see this is to analyse the back-and-forth relations. There are a number of diﬀerent ways to
deﬁne the back-and-forth relations, but from a computability-theoretic perspective the most
natural is the following due to its connections with Σα and Πα sentences.
Deﬁnition 2.1. The standard asymmetric back-and-forth relations ≤α on A, for α < ω1, are
deﬁned by:
1. ¯a ≤0 ¯b if ¯a and ¯b satisfy the same quantiﬁer-free formulas from among the ﬁrst ∣¯a∣-many
formulas.
2. For α > 0, ¯a ≤α ¯b if for each β < α and ¯d there is ¯c such that ¯b ¯d ≤β ¯a¯c.
We deﬁne ¯a ≡α ¯b if ¯a ≤α ¯b and ¯b ≤α ¯a. We also deﬁne ¯a ≡∞¯b if ¯a ≡α ¯b for all α < ω1.
It is not hard to prove by induction that for α ≥1, ¯a ≤α ¯b if and only if every Σα sentence
true of ¯b is true of ¯a. Similarly, ¯a ≡∞¯b if and only if ¯a and ¯b satisfy the same Lω1ω formulas.
For each pair of tuples ¯a and ¯b such that ¯a /≡∞¯b, choose a formula ϕ¯a;¯b(¯x) such that
A ⊧ϕ¯a;¯b(¯a) but A ⊧¬ϕ¯a;¯b(¯b). Then deﬁne ψ¯a(¯x) ∶= ⩕¯b/≡∞¯a ϕ¯a;¯b(¯x). So we have that A ⊧ψ¯a(¯b)
if and only if ¯a ≡∞¯b. We may also add as a conjunct to ψ¯a(¯x) all of the atomic formulas
true of ¯a.
Now deﬁne:
ρ∅∶= ∀x ⩔
b∈A
ψb(x)
ρ¯a ∶= ∀¯u(ψ¯a(¯u) Ð→∀x ⩔
b∈A
ψ¯ab(¯u,x))
σ∅∶= ⩕
b∈A
∃xψb(x)
σ¯a ∶= ∀¯u(ψ¯a(¯u) Ð→⩕
b∈A
∃xψ¯ab(¯u,x))
3


and
θ ∶= ⩕
¯a∈A
ρ¯a ∧σ¯a.
It is easy to argue by a standard back-and-forth argument that θ is a Scott sentence for A.
We call θ the canonical Scott sentence for A.
Theorem 2.2 (Scott [Sco65]). Every countable structure has a Scott sentence.
Proof. It is clear that A ⊧θ. Suppose that B is countable and B ⊧θ. Suppose that we have
a ﬁnite partial map A →B mapping ¯a to ¯b with ψ¯a(¯b). Then for such ¯a and ¯b:
• ¯a and ¯b have the same atomic type;
• given a′ ∈A, since B ⊧σ¯a ∧ψ¯a(¯b), there is b′ ∈B with B ⊧ψ¯aa′(¯bb′);
• given b′ ∈B, since B ⊧ρ¯a ∧ψ¯a(¯b), there is a′ ∈A with B ⊧ψ¯aa′(¯bb′);
So by a back-and-forth argument we can extend our ﬁnite partial isomorphism to an isomor-
phism A →B. Thus θ is a Scott sentence for A.
As a corollary, by adding constants to the language, we get:
Corollary 2.3. Let A be a countable structure and ¯a,¯b ∈A. Then there is an automorphism
of A taking ¯a to ¯b if and only if ¯a ≡∞¯b.
There are only countably many tuples ¯a in A, so there is a countable ordinal α such, that
for ¯a,¯b ∈A, if ¯a /≡∞¯b then ¯a ≰α ¯b. We may choose the formulas ϕ¯a,¯b to be Πα, so that ψ¯a are
also Πα. Then the formula Θ is Πα+2. So there is a natural notion of rank that we can assign
to A based on the least such ordinal α. Ash and Knight [AK00] prefer the following ranks:
Deﬁnition 2.4. For ¯a ∈A, deﬁne r(¯a) as the least ordinal α such that for all ¯b, if ¯a ≤α ¯b
then ¯a ≡∞¯b. Then deﬁne:
• r(A) = sup{r(¯a) ∶¯a ∈A};
• R(A) = sup{r(¯a) + 1 ∶¯a ∈A};
It is possible for a two structures A and B to have r(A) = r(B) = λ a limit ordinal, but
R(A) = λ and R(B) = λ + 1.
Scott’s original proof of Theorem 2.2 used symmetric back-and-forth relations ∼α instead
of the asymmetric ones deﬁned above. In the deﬁnition below we extend only by single
elements c and d rather than by tuples to show another possible variation.
Deﬁnition 2.5. The standard symmetric back-and-forth relations ∼α on A, for α < ω1, are
deﬁned by:
1. ¯a ∼0 ¯b if ¯a and ¯b satisfy the same quantiﬁer-free formulas.
2. For α > 0, ¯a ∼α ¯b if for each β < α and d there is c such that ¯ac ∼β ¯bd, and for all c there
is d such that ¯ac ∼β ¯bd.
4


Again, one can argue that there is a countable ordinal α such that if ¯a ∼α ¯b, then ¯a ∼β ¯b for
all β. We can deﬁne a rank based on these back-and-forth relations.
Deﬁnition 2.6. For ¯a ∈A, deﬁne sr(¯a) as the least ordinal α such that for all ¯b, if ¯a ∼α ¯b
then ¯a ≡∞¯b. Then deﬁne:
• sr(A) = sup{sr(¯a) ∶¯a ∈A};
• SR(A) = sup{sr(¯a) + 1 ∶¯a ∈A};
This is what Marker [Mar16] uses as the deﬁnition of Scott rank. It is from this connection
with Scott’s original proof of Theorem 2.2 that the name Scott rank is given to these notions
of rank, though it is unclear which rank should hold the title. In general, we prefer the ranks
R and SR over the ranks r and sr, as they contain more information. These ranks R and
SR agree at multiples of ω2.
There are two other possible variations on the back-and-forth relations: deﬁning the
symmetric relations ∼α to extend by tuples (which is a common deﬁnition) and deﬁning the
asymmetric relations ≤α to extend by single elements (which is rarely seen). Each of these
deﬁnitions also gives rise to a notion of rank.
Another common notion of rank, used, e.g., by Sacks [Sac07] and in Marker’s book on
model theory [Mar02], is as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.7. Let A be a countable structure.
We deﬁne fragments LA
α of Lω1ω and
LA
α -theories T A
α as follows:
1. LA
0 is ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order logic;
2. T A
α is the complete theory of A in LA
α ;
3. LA
λ is the union of LA
α for α < λ a limit ordinal; and
4. LA
α+1 is the least fragment of Lω1ω containing LA
α and also containing, for each non-
principal n-type p of T A
α , the conjunction ⋀p of all the formulas in p.
Essentially, T A
α+1 gives a name to all of the non-principal types of T A
α , though this may then
introduce new non-principal types. However, one can show that this process stabilizes and
for some α, all of the types of T A
α realized in A are principal. One can then deﬁne the Scott
rank of A to be the least α such that A is the atomic model of T A
α . This rank agrees with
the previous ranks at multiples of ω2. This notion of rank can be useful when one wants to
apply ideas from ﬁnitary model theory.
Gao [Gao07] also introduces a notion of Scott rank based on back-and-forth games, which
is similar in spirit to the ranks deﬁned using back-and-forth relations.
A ﬁnal notion of Scott rank was introduced by Montalb´an [Mon15] based on the following
list of equivalent properties:
Theorem 2.8 (Montalb´an [Mon15]). Let A be a countable structure, and α a countable
ordinal. The following are equivalent:
5


1. A has a Πα+1 Scott sentence.
2. Every automorphism orbit in A is Σα-deﬁnable without parameters.
3. A is uniformly (boldface) ∆0α-categorical.
Montalb´an proposed the following deﬁnition of Scott rank:
Deﬁnition 2.9. The Scott rank of a countable structure A is the least ordinal α such that
A has a Πα+1 Scott sentence.
Montalb´an argued that this is the correct notion of Scott rank because it is robust in the
sense that it has many equivalent characterizations via Theorem 2.8. It is this deﬁnition
that we use for most of the rest of this article, except when otherwise noted.
There is a clear connection between this notion of Scott rank proposed by Montalb´an
and the rank R of Deﬁnition 2.4 deﬁned using the asymmetric back-and-forth relations ≤α.
Given ¯a ∈A, the formula ψ¯a deﬁnes the automorphism orbit of ¯a; this is because if ¯a ≡∞¯b,
then the structures (A, ¯a) and (A,¯b), with ¯a and ¯b named as constants, are isomorphic.
With α = r(¯a), the automorphism orbit of ¯a is deﬁned by a Πα formula. Thus the Scott rank
as deﬁned by Montalb´an and the rank R diﬀer by at most one.
3
Scott Complexity
There is some arbitrariness in choosing to deﬁne Scott rank using Π formulas rather than Σ
formulas. Indeed, if we deﬁned the Scott rank of a structure to be the least ordinal α such
that the structure has a Σα+2 Scott sentence, then we would have the desirable property that
naming constants does not change Scott rank: A has the same Scott rank as (A, ¯c) for any
tuple ¯c ∈A. This follows from the following fact:
Theorem 3.1 (Montalb´an). Let A be a countable structure.
Then A has a Σα+1 Scott
sentence if and only if for some ¯c ∈A, (A, ¯c) has a Πα Scott sentence.
The proof of this fact is less obvious than it seems; indeed it was stated as an obvious fact
without proof in [Mon15] but a proof was ﬁrst provided (for Σ3 sentences) in [Mon17]. A
full proof appears in [AGHTT].
Moreover, deﬁning Scott rank in this way is still robust; combining Theorems 2.8 and
3.1, we get:
Theorem 3.2. Let A be a countable structure, and α a countable ordinal. The following are
equivalent:
1. A has a Σα+2 Scott sentence.
2. There are parameters ¯c such that every automorphism orbit in A is Σα-deﬁnable over
¯c.
3. A is (boldface) ∆0
α-categorical.
6


In [Mon], Montalb´an refers to the Scott rank of Deﬁnition 2.9 as parameterless Scott rank
and the Scott rank deﬁned using Σ formulas as parametrized Scott rank, and uses the latter
as the deﬁnition.
Rather than choosing between these two possibilities, one can give up on assigning a
single ordinal rank, and rather say that the Scott complexity (or Scott sentence complexity)
of a structure is the least complexity of a Scott sentence for that structure, e.g., if a structure
has a Π3 Scott sentence but no Σ3 Scott sentence, then its Scott complexity is Π3. (This is
not yet a formal deﬁnition, as we have not speciﬁed the possible complexities of sentences.)
Now these complexities are not totally ordered; Πα and Σα are incomparable. So a natural
question is: Can a structure have both a Σα+1 Scott sentence and a Πα+1 Scott sentence, but
no Σα or Πα Scott sentence? The answer turns out to be yes—for example, the group Z has
a Σ3 and a Π3 Scott sentence, but no Σ2 or Π2 Scott sentence—but the following theorem of
A. Miller says that the structure must then have a Scott sentence which is a conjunction of
a Σα sentence and a Πα sentence. We call such a sentence a d−Σα sentence, where d stands
for diﬀerence, because it is the diﬀerence of two Σα sentences.
Theorem 3.3 (A. Miller [Mil83]). Let A be a countable structure. Then if A has both a Σα
and a Πα Scott sentence, it has a d−Σβ Scott sentence for some β < α.
So for example the group Z has a d−Σ2 sentence but no Σ2 or Π2 sentence. Thus when
we say that the Scott complexity of a structure is the least complexity of a Scott sentence
for that structure, we have to include not just Σα and Πα as complexities, but d−Σ2. But
among these complexities, there is always a single least complexity of a Scott sentence.
Σ1
#❍
❍
❍
Σ2
#❍
❍
❍
Σ3
#❍
❍
❍
Σω
 ❇
❇
❇
❇
Σ0
=④④④
!❈❈❈
d-Σ1
;✈
✈
✈
#❍
❍
❍
d-Σ2
;✈
✈
✈
#❍
❍
❍
d-Σ3
/ ⋯
⋯
Π1
;✈
✈
✈
Π2
;✈
✈
✈
Π3
;✈
✈
✈
Πω
>⑤
⑤
⑤
Are there further possible least complexities of Scott sentences?
For all of the other
complexity classes of sentences we can think of, any structure with a Scott sentence of that
complexity also has a simpler Scott sentence. Let us give two examples. First, if a structure
has a Scott sentence which is a negation of a d−Σα sentence, that is, of the form ϕ∨ψ where ϕ
is Σα and ψ is Πα, then one of either ϕ or ψ is a Scott sentence on its own, and so the structure
has either a Σα or Πα Scott sentence. Second, there are complexities n−Σα corresponding to
the diﬀerence hierarchy. Suppose that a structure has a Scott sentence which is 3−Σα, that
is, of the form (ϕ ∧¬ψ)∨θ where these sentences are all Σα. Then either the d−Σα sentence
ϕ ∧¬ψ is a Scott sentence, or the Σα sentence ψ is a Scott sentence. A similar argument
works for the rest of the diﬀerence hierarchy. Empirically through arguments such as these,
and by checking examples, it appears that Σα, Πα, and d−Σα are the only possible Scott
complexities. Thus we deﬁne:
Deﬁnition 3.4. The Scott sentence complexity of a structure A is the least complexity, from
among Σα, Πα, and d−Σα, of a Scott sentence for A.
It is desirable to have some kind of more rigorous argument that these should be the
possible complexities, and that it is not just that we cannot think of any other possibilities.
7


For this, we use a perspective that began in [Mil83] of looking at the Borel complexity of
the set of copies of a structure. Given a language L, there is a Polish space Mod(L) of all
L-structures with domain ω. Given a structure A ∈Mod(L), let Iso(A) be the set of all
isomorphic copies of A in Mod(L). There is a correspondence between Scott sentences of
A and the complexity of Iso(A) via the Lopez-Escobar theorem, and its strengthenings by
Vaught and D. Miller.
Theorem 3.5 (Lopez-Escobar [LE65], Vaught [Vau61], D. Miller [Mil78]). Let K be a sub-
class of Mod(L) which is closed under isomorphism. Then K is Σ0
α if and only if K is
axiomatized by an inﬁnitary Σα sentence. The same is true for Πα and Πα sentences, and
for the diﬀerence hierarchy.
Since each structure has a Scott sentence, Iso(A) is always Borel.
Intuitively, the Lopez-Escobar result should extend to any natural and robust notion of
complexity for sentences. So in place of looking at the least complexity of a Scott sentence
for A, we look at the complexity of Iso(A). This gives us access to additional structure via
Wadge reducibility.
Deﬁnition 3.6 (Wadge). Let A and B be subsets of Mod(L). We say that A is Wadge
reducible to B, and write A ≤W B, if there is a continuous function f with A = f −1[B], i.e.
x ∈A ⇐⇒f(x) ∈B.
The equivalence classes under this pre-order are called the Wadge degrees; we write [A]W for
the Wadge degree of A. The Wadge hierarchy is the set of Wadge degrees under continuous
reductions.
With enough determinacy, the Wadge hierarchy is very well-behaved; it is well-founded
and almost totally ordered (in the sense that any anti-chain has size at most two).
Theorem 3.7 (Martin and Monk, AD). The Wadge order is well-founded.
Theorem 3.8 (Wadge’s Lemma, AD, [Wad83]). Given A,B ⊆ωω, either A ≤W B or B ≤W
ωω −A.
Since determinacy for Borel sets is provable in ZFC, this theorem holds in ZFC for such sets.
Since Iso(A) is Borel, we will not need to use any determinacy assumptions.
In general, for each of the pointclasses Γ from among Σ0
α, Π0α, ∆0α, d−Σ0
α, and other
pointclasses arising from the Borel or diﬀerence hierarchies, if A is Wadge-reducible to a set
in Γ, then A itself is in Γ; and moreover, there is a Γ-complete set. We denote by Γ the
Wadge degree of a Γ-complete set. So, for example, Σ0
1 is the Wadge degree of open, but
not clopen, sets.
Now we deﬁne:
Deﬁnition 3.9. The Scott complexity of a structure A is the Wadge degree of Iso(A).
Of course we want to show that this is the same as Deﬁnition 3.4. (We have made a slight
diﬀerentiation between the two by calling one Scott sentence complexity and the other Scott
complexity; they are technically diﬀerent types of objects, the former being a complexity class
8


of sentences and the latter being a Wadge degree, though by the Lopez-Escobar theorem
the two are in correspondence.) The possible Scott complexities are exactly what we expect
given the discussion above: Π0α, Σ0
α, and d−Σ0
α. There are certain values of α for which some
of these are not possible, e.g. Σ2 is not the Scott complexity of any structure. A complete
list is as follows:
Theorem 3.10 (A. Miller [Mil83], Alvir, Greenberg, Harrison-Trainor, and Turetsky [AGHTT]).
The possible Scott complexities of countable structures A are:
1. Π0
α for α ≥1,
2. Σ0
α for α ≥3 a successor ordinal,
3. d−Σ0
α for α ≥1 a successor ordinal.
There is a countable structure with each of these Wadge degrees.
A. Miller constructed a number of examples of structures with various Scott complexities,
and also ruled out some possibilities, such as Σ0
2 (for relational languages). He left open
the case of constructing a structure of Scott complexity Σ0
α+1 for α a limit ordinal. Alvir,
Greenberg, Harrison-Trainor, and Turetsky found such examples, and showed that these are
the only possibilities.
As a consequence of this theorem, Scott sentence complexity as in Deﬁnition 3.4 and Scott
complexity as in Deﬁnition 3.9 are really the same thing, under the natural correspondence
between Wadge degrees of Iso(A) and Scott sentences for A, that is, identifying Σα and Σ0
α,
etc.
4
Structures of High Scott Rank
We now turn to an eﬀective analysis of Scott complexity. We say that an ordinal α is X-
computable if there is an X-computable linear order isomorphic to α. As there are only
countably many X-computable ordinals, there must be a least non-X-computable ordinal,
which we call ωX
1
(or ωCK
1
when X is computable).
Since any initial segment of an X-
computable well-founded linear order has a X-computable presentation, the X-computable
ordinals are closed downwards; the X-computable ordinals are exactly the ordinals below
ωX
1 .
We will give simpler and more elementary proofs than are usual in the literature, avoiding
the use of Σ1
1 bounding, ordinal notations, or the Barwise compactness theorem. (See, e.g.,
[AK00] for proofs of some of these results using the Barwise compactness theorem.) Instead,
our main tool will be the fact that if an X-computable tree is well-founded, then its tree
rank is an X-computable ordinal. Recall that the tree rank is deﬁned as follows:
• rk(x) = 0 if x is a leaf.
• rk(x) is otherwise the least ordinal (or possibly ∞) greater than the ranks of the
children of x.
The rank of a tree is the rank of its root node.
9


Theorem 4.1. Let T be an X-computable well-founded tree. Then the tree rank of T is an
X-computable ordinal.
Proof sketch. Given a tree T ⊆ω<ω we will deﬁne computably in T a linear order, called the
Kleene-Brouwer order. If T is well-founded then the Kleene-Brouwer order will be as well;
and in this case, the order type of the Kleene-Brouwer order will be an ordinal greater than
the tree rank of T. The Kleene-Brouwer order is deﬁned on the nodes of T by s ≤KB t if and
only if
• t ⪯s (s extends t) or
• s(n) < t(n) and t ↾n = s ↾n (s is to the left of t).
If an X-computable tree T is well-founded with tree rank α, the Kleene-Brouwer order of T
can be computed from T and hence is an X-computable presentation of an ordinal β ≥α.
Thus α itself is X-computable. We leave the details to the reader; they are not diﬃcult.
4.1
Bounds on Scott complexity
There are countably many computable structures, and hence by a simple counting argument
there must be some ordinal α < ω1 which is an upper bound on the Scott rank of a computable
structure. Our goal in this section is to compute this bound, as well as to prove some other
results along the way.
For this section, it is helpful to extend the back-and-forth relations to tuples from diﬀerent
structures.
Deﬁnition 4.2. Let A and B be structures. The standard asymmetric back-and-forth rela-
tions ≤α, for α < ω1, are deﬁned for ¯a ∈A and ¯b ∈B of the same length by:
1. (A, ¯a) ≤0 (B,¯b) if ¯a and ¯b satisfy the same quantiﬁer-free formulas from among the ﬁrst
∣¯a∣-many formulas.
2. For α > 0, (A, ¯a) ≤α (B,¯b) if for each β < α and ¯d ∈B there is ¯c ∈A such that
(B,¯b ¯d) ≤β (A, ¯a¯c).
We deﬁne ≡∞etc. as before.
To begin, suppose that we have a computable structure A.
Theorem 4.3 (Nadel [Nad74]). Let A and B be X-computable structures. If A ≡α B for
every α < ωX
1 , then A ≅B.
Proof. A ﬁnite partial isomorphism maps an element ¯a of A to a tuple ¯b of B such that
(A, ¯a) ≡0 (B,¯b): ¯a and ¯b satisfy the same atomic formulas from among the ﬁrst ∣¯a∣-many. We
can form a tree of ﬁnite partial isomorphisms; the root node is the empty partial isomorphism,
and the children of a node are the ﬁnite partial isomorphisms extending that node.
Let T be the subtree of the tree of ﬁnite partial isomorphisms such that at the nth level,
all of the ﬁnite partial isomorphism contain the ﬁrst n elements of A in their domain, and the
ﬁrst n elements of B in their range. So T is X-computable. A path through T corresponds
to a (total) isomorphism A →B.
10


Claim 1. Consider a node σ of T corresponding to a ﬁnite partial isomorphism ¯a ↦¯b. If
(A, ¯a) ≡α⋅4 (B,¯b), then the tree rank of σ is at least α.
Proof. We argue by induction on α. We must show that for each β < α, there is a child of σ
of tree rank at least β. Suppose without loss of generality that σ is at the nth level of the
tree.
First, let d be the n + 1st element of B. (If d is already contained in ¯b, then do nothing
here; we assume that d is not in ¯b.)
Since (A, ¯a) ≡α⋅4 (B,¯b), there is c ∈A such that
(A, ¯ac) ≡β⋅4+2 (B,¯bd). Now let c′ ∈A be the n + 1st element of A. (Again, if c′ is already
contained in ¯ac, then do nothing here; we assume that c′ is not in ¯ac.) Let d′ ∈B be such
that (A, ¯acc′) ≡β⋅4 (B,¯bdd′). Then ¯acc′ ↦¯bdd′ is a ﬁnite partial isomorphism which is a child
of σ, and by the induction hypothesis, it has tree rank at least β.
Now (A,∅) ≡ωX
1 (B,∅) and so the tree rank of T is at least ωX
1 . Since T is X-computable,
T must have a path, which is an isomorphism A →B.
We can easily apply this to tuples in a single structure.
Corollary 4.4 (Nadel [Nad74]). Let A be an X-computable structures and ¯a,¯b ∈A. If ¯a ≡α ¯b
for every α < ωX
1 , then there is an automorphism of A taking ¯a to ¯b.
We also get an upper bound on the Scott complexity of a computable structure.
Corollary 4.5 (Nadel [Nad74]). An X-computable structure has a ΠωCK
1
+2 Scott sentence,
and hence has Scott rank at most ωCK
1
+ 1.
This is true for all of the diﬀerent deﬁnitions of Scott rank.
Proof. By the previous corollary, if ¯a ≤ωX
1 ¯b, then ¯a ≡∞¯b. Then as in the discussion preceding
Deﬁnition 2.4, we can choose the formulas ϕ¯a,¯b in the deﬁnition of the canonical Scott sentence
to be ΠωX
1 , so that the resulting Scott sentence is ΠωX
1 +2.
Next we will consider the computability of the Scott sentences of a computable structure.
We give a slightly informal deﬁnition of the computable formulas of Lω1ω. For the fully formal
deﬁnition, see [AK00].
Deﬁnition 4.6.
• A computable Σ0 or Π0 formula is just a ﬁnitary quantiﬁer-free formula.
• A computable Σα formula is a disjunction of formulas ∃¯xψ(¯x) where the formulas ψ(¯x)
are computable Πβ for some β < α, and the there is a c.e. set of codes for the formulas
over which the disjunction is being taken.
• A computable Πα formula is a conjunction of formulas ∃¯xψ(¯x) where the formulas
ψ(¯x) are computable Σβ for some β < α, and the there is a c.e. set of codes for the
formulas over which the conjunction is being taken.
Let A be an X-computable structure. We will deﬁne, recursively for α < ωX
1 and tuples
¯a ∈A, formulas
11


• ϕ¯a,α such that B ⊧ϕ¯a,α(¯b) if and only if (A, ¯a) ≤α (B,¯b); and
• ψ¯a,α such that B ⊧ψ¯a,α(¯b) if and only if (B,¯b) ≤α (A, ¯a).
We put ϕ¯a,0(¯x) = ψ¯a,0(¯x) to be the conjunction of the ﬁrst ∣¯x∣-many atomic and negated
atomic formulas about ¯x. For α > 0, we put
ϕ¯a,α(¯x) = ⋀
β<α
∀¯y ⋁
¯c∈A
ψ¯a¯c,β(¯x, ¯y)
and
ψ¯a,α(¯x) = ⋀
β<α
⋀
¯c∈A
∃¯y ϕ¯a¯c,β(¯x, ¯y).
Both ϕ¯a,α and ψ¯a,α are computable Πα⋅2 formulas.
Suppose that α is an X-computable ordinal such that for all ¯a,¯b ∈A, if ¯a ≤α ¯b then ¯a ≡∞¯b.
Then A ⊧ψ¯a,α(¯b) if and only if ¯a ≡∞¯b. In the deﬁnition of the canonical Scott sentence, we
may use ψ¯a,α as the formula ψ¯a. We get that the resulting Scott sentence is a computable
Πα⋅2+2 sentence. (Note that this argument only works if the ordinal α is X-computable.)
Thus we get:
Theorem 4.7 (Nadel [Nad74]). Let A be an X-computable structure. Then A has Scott
rank < ωX
1 if and only if A has an X-computable Scott sentence.
An interesting line of investigation is to study the diﬀerence between the least-complexity
Scott sentence and the least-complexity computable Scott sentence for a structure. Not much
is known, though for example Ho constructed a subgroup of Q with a d−Σ2 Scott sentence
but no computable d−Σ2 Scott sentence [Ho17]. (The structure has computable Σ3 and Π3
structures, so that Theorem 3.3 is not true for computable Scott sentences.)
Finally, we will prove eﬀective versions of Theorem 4.3 and Corollary 4.4.
Theorem 4.8 (Nadel [Nad74]). Let A and B be X-computable structures. If A and B satisfy
the same X-computable inﬁnitary formulas, then they are isomorphic.
Proof. For each α < ωX
1 , we have that B ⊧ϕ∅,α where this is the X-computable formula
deﬁned above. This implies that A ≤α B for each α. Thus A and B are isomorphic by
Theorem 4.3.
Corollary 4.9 (Nadel [Nad74]). Let A be an X-computable structure. If ¯a and ¯b ∈A satisfy
the same X-computable formulas, then there is an automorphism of A taking ¯a to ¯b.
4.2
Construction of structures of high Scott complexity
Corollary 4.5 is the best possible bound on the Scott complexity of an X-computable struc-
ture. Harrison [Har68] constructed a computable linear order of order type ωCK
1
⋅(1 + Q),
which has Scott complexity ΠωCK
1
+2. It is a pseudo-well-ordering in the sense that it has no
hyperarithmetic descending sequence. More generally, we can construct the Harrison linear
order ωX
1 ⋅(1+Q) relative to any set X, which has Scott complexity ΠωX
1 +2. Often, the Barwise
compactness theorem is used to construct the Harrison linear order, but we will give a more
12


natural construction found in [Kle55] and which is explained in Lemma III.2.1 of [Sac90].
Our account comes from [Cha17]. We will give the general overview of the argument giving
most but not all of the details.
The relation “Y is not hyperarithmetic in X” is Σ1
1(X) and so there is an X-computable
tree T whose paths are pairs ⟨Y,f⟩where f witnesses that Y is not hyperarithmetic in X.
T is X-computable uniformly in X and has no X-hyperarithmetic path. Take the Kleene-
Brouwer order of T. We get an X-computable linear order L with no X-hyperarithmetic
descending sequence, as given a descending sequence in L, with one more jump we can
compute a path through T. Then we argue that L has order type ωX
1 ⋅(1 + Q) + α for some
α < ωX
1 . This takes several steps:
• Let γ be the order type of the well-founded initial segment of L. Write L = L1 + L2
with L1 the well-founded initial segment of L. If γ were a computable ordinal, then
we could hyperarithmetically split L as L1 + L2, and L2 has no least element, giving a
hyperarithmetic descending sequence in L. Also, we cannot have γ > ωX
1 as then we
could ﬁx some element u such that {v ∈L ∶v < u} is a computable linear ordering of
order type ωX
1 . Thus γ = ωX
1 .
• Similarly, given any u ∈L, either {v ∈L ∶v ≥u} is well-founded or the well-founded
initial segment of {v ∈L ∶v ≥u} has order type ωX
1 . Thus L ≅ωX
1 ⋅(1+L∗)+α for some
linear order L∗and ordinal α.
• α must be computable, as if u is the initial element of α, {v ∈L ∶v ≥u} is a computable
linear order.
• We claim that L∗is dense and without endpoints. If L∗had a left endpoint, then
ωX
1 + ωX
1 would be an initial segment of L, which we have already argued is not the
case. If it had a right endpoint, then ωX
1 + α would be a ﬁnal segment of L, which
cannot happen because ωX
1 +α is not X-computable. And if L∗was not dense, then we
could write L ≅⋯+ ωX
1 + ωX
1 + ⋯, and this cannot happen as ωX
1 is not X-computable.
Finally, we use a trick to remove the α: we replace L by L⋅ω which has order type ωX
1 ⋅(1+Q).
Now we have to argue that the Scott complexity of ωX
1 ⋅(1 + Q) is ΠωX
1 +2. We must show
that it has no ΣωX
1 +2 Scott sentence. Using Theorem 3.2, it suﬃces to show that there is
no tuple ¯c such that the automorphism orbits are deﬁnable by Σα formulas, α < ωX
1 . (Note
that if an orbit is deﬁnable by a ΣωX
1 formula, then it is deﬁnable by a Σα formula for some
α < ωX
1 .) The parameters ¯c do not help us deﬁne the automorphism orbits because, given
¯c = (c1,... ,cn) with c1 < c2 < ⋯< cn, between some two of the parameters is a linear order of
order type ωX
1 ⋅(1+Q)+β for some β < ωX
1 . So let us ignore the parameters. (See, for example,
Section 15.3.3 of [AK00] for similar arguments.) Let u be an element of the non-well-founded
part of the Harrison linear order, and suppose to the contrary that ϕ(¯x) is a Σα formula
deﬁning the automorphism type of u, with α < ωX
1 . Then (using the formula ϕu,α from the
previous section) there is an X-computable Πα⋅2 formula deﬁning the automorphism orbit
of u. So we may assume, after increasing α, that ϕ is X-computable. So the automorphism
orbit {v ∈L ∶L ⊧ϕ(v)} of u is X-hyperarithmetic, and has no least element. Then we can
ﬁnd a hyperarithmetic descending sequence in L.
Thus we obtain:
13


Theorem 4.10. Given X ∈2ω, there is an X-computable linear order of Scott rank ωX
1 + 1
and Scott complexity ΠωX
1 +2. Moreover, there is a uniform operator Φ such that Φ(X) has
order type ωX
1 ⋅(1 + Q), so that ωX
1 = ωY
1 if and only if ΦX ≅ΦY .
In general, we say that a structure A has high Scott rank / high Scott complexity if
satisﬁes one of the following equivalent conditions:
• it does not have an X-computable Scott sentence;
• its Scott rank is not X-computable, i.e. at least ωA
1 ;
• it has Scott complexity at least ΠωA
1 .
All of the diﬀerent possible deﬁnitions of Scott rank agree on whether a structure has high
Scott rank, and if it does have high Scott rank, they agree on whether the Scott rank is ωX
1
or ωX
1 + 1.
In terms of Scott complexity, there are ﬁve possible Scott complexities for a structure of
high Scott complexity:
ΣωCK
1
&▲
▲
▲
▲
ΣωCK
1
+1
'❖
❖
❖
❖
d-ΣωCK
1
8♣
♣
♣
♣
'◆
◆
◆◆
d-ΣωCK
1
+1
'❖
❖
❖
❖
ΠωCK
1
8r
r
r
ΠωCK
1
+1
7♦
♦
♦
♦
ΠωCK
1
+2
Structures of Scott complexity ΠωCK
1
and ΠωCK
1
+ 1 have Scott rank ωCK
1
, and structures of
the other three Scott complexities have Scott rank ωCK
1
+ 1.
While a computable structure with Scott rank ωCK
1
+ 1 was known in the 1960’s, it was
not until the 2000’s that a computable structure of Scott rank ωCK
1
was constructed. [Mak81]
gave a complicated construction of a ∆0
2 structure with Scott rank ωCK
1
, and later Knight
and Millar gave a simpler construction while also obtaining a computable structure [KM10].
The structures they build have Scott complexity Scott complexity ΠωCK
1
.
Theorem 4.11 (Knight and Millar [KM10]). There is a computable structure of Scott rank
ωCK
1
and Scott complexity ΠωCK
1
. Moreover, given X, there is an X-computable structure of
Scott rank ωX
1 and Scott complexity ΠωX
1 .
Proof sketch. The construction of Knight and Millar uses the Barwise compactness theorem
to build a computable thin homogeneous tree, where these terms are deﬁned below. We will
give a proof along the same lines, building a computable thin homogeneous tree, but we will
build this tree in a more constructive and avoid using the Barwise compactness theorem.
We will give a computable construction but the construction relativizes to any X.
Deﬁnition 4.12. A tree T is thin if there is a computable ordinal bound on the ordinal tree
ranks at each level of the tree.
Note that there can be nodes on the tree of rank ∞; the bound is just on the nodes with
ordinal rank.
14


Deﬁnition 4.13. A tree T is homogeneous if:
• Whenever x has a successor of rank α, it has inﬁnitely many successors of rank α.
• If some element at level n has a successor of rank α, every element at level n with rank
> α has a successor of rank α.
Such a tree is called homogeneous because any two nodes at the same level of the tree
and with the same rank are automorphic, and indeed the isomorphism type of the tree is
determined by which tree ranks appear at each level. One can show that a computable
thin homogeneous tree has a ΠωCK
1
Scott sentence; one writes down the conjunctions of the
sentences, one for each level, which say which tree ranks show up at that level. Each of these
sentences is ΠωCK
1
because there is a bound on the tree ranks at that level. Though the tree
ranks at each level are bounded, if they are unbounded below ωCK
1
overall, the tree has Scott
complexity ΠωCK
1
. See [KM10] for details.
So we want to construct a thin homogeneous tree with unbounded ranks. To construct
such a tree, ﬁrst ﬁx a computable presentation H of the Harrison linear order. By the trick of
replacing each element of H by a copy of ω, we may assume that we can compute successors,
predecessors, and limits in H. We construct for each n = 1,2,... a set Sn ⊆H such that:
1. S1 ⊆S2 ⊆S3 ⊆⋯,
2. ⋃i Si = H,
3. S1 is coﬁnal in H,
4. each Sn is bounded above inside the well-founded part of H,
5. for each a ∈Sn which is a limit element of H, {b ∈Sn+1 ∶b < a} is unbounded below a,
6. for each a ∈Sn which is a successor element of H, the predecessor of a is in Sn+1.
To construct S1, consider the elements of H in order, and put each element which is larger
than all of the previous elements into S1. For example, if the elements of H1 are h1,h2,h3,...,
and the ﬁrst nine elements are ordered as
h9 < h2 < h5 < h1 < h6 < h7 < h3 < h4 < h8
then we put h1 in S1, omit h2 because it is smaller than h2, put h3 and h4 in S1, then
omit h5, h6, and h7 because they are lower than h4, put h8 in S1, and omit h9. So we get
S1 = {h1,h3,h4,h8,...}. Note that the order type of S1 is ω. Only ﬁnitely many of the
elements of S1 are in the well-founded part of H; this is for (4).
Given S1,... ,Sn, we construct Sn+1 as follows. Each element of Sn will be an element of
Sn+1, satisfying (1). For each element y of Sn −Sn−1 which is a limit element of H, we can
ﬁnd x ∈Sn such that there are no element z of Sn+1 with x < z < y. Then, in the open interval
{z ∈H ∶x < z < y} we can do the same construction as we did for S1, listing out the elements
in this interval and putting each element which is greater than the previous elements into
Sn+1. Thus we satisfy (5). For each successor element of Sn, we put its predecessor into Sn+1,
15


satisfying (6). To satisfy (2), we also have to add to Sn+1 the ﬁrst element of H which does
not yet appear in Sn. (4) is easy to verify, and (3) is just about S1.
Let T a subtree of the tree of all descending sequences in H, with the nodes at level n
being from Sn; i.e., the path ¯h = ⟨h1,... ,hn⟩has h1 ∈S1,h2 ∈S2,... ,hn ∈Sn. Given a node
corresponding to the sequence ¯h = ⟨h1,... ,hn⟩, it is easy to argue using (5) and (6) that the
tree rank of ¯h is the order type of {x ∈H ∶x < hn} if hn is in the well-founded part of H, and
∞otherwise. By choice of the Sn—namely (4)—T is a thin tree. To make it homogeneous,
we just need to duplicate each node inﬁnitely many times. By (3), the root node—which is
the empty sequence—has tree rank ∞, but by (2), there is no bound on the tree ranks at all
levels.
The construction of the Harrison linear order was uniform in the sense that given X, one
could eﬀectively construct the Harrison linear order relative to X. Moreover, if ωX
1 = ωY
1 , then
the Harrison linear order relative to X is the same as the Harrison linear order relative to Y .
One can view this as saying that the construction produces a natural/canonical structure, the
Harrison linear order. On the other hand, the construction just given of an X-computable
structure of Scott rank ωX
1 is not uniform in this way. The structure one gets depends on
the sets S1,S2,..., and these in turn depend on the particular presentation of the Harrison
linear order H.
Chan [Cha17] asked whether there is some other uniform construction of a computable
structure of Scott rank ωCK
1
. Becker [Bec17] and Chan, Harrison-Trainor, and Marks (un-
published) independently showed that there is no uniform construction.
Theorem 4.14 (Becker [Bec17]; Chan, Harrison-Trainor, and Marks). There is no Borel
operator Φ such that:
• for all X,Y ∈2ω, Φ(X) ≅Φ(Y ) ⇐⇒ωX
1 = ωY
1
• for all X ∈2ω, Φ(X) is a computable structure of Scott complexity strictly less than
ΠωX
1 +2.
Proof. The proof we give is due to an anonymous referee. Suppose to the contrary that
there was such a Φ. Since Φ is Borel, for suﬃciently large β, the inverse image of a Σ0
β set
under Φ is Σ0
β. Choose X such that ωX
1 > β. Let A = Φ(X). If Iso(A) is Σ0
ωX
1 +2, then so is
Φ−1[Iso(A)]. But by Theorem 2.3 of [Mar88], the set Φ−1[Iso(A)] = {Y ∶ωY
1 = ωX
1 } is not
Σ0
ωX
1 +2.
Becker [Bec20] later proved a number of strengthenings of this result.
Theorem 4.8 says that two computable structures that satisfy the same computable in-
ﬁnitary formulas are isomorphic. Given a computable structure A, the computable inﬁnitary
theory of A is the collection of all the computable Lω1ω sentences true of A. The structure
of Scott rank ωCK
1
constructed by Knight and Millar (Theorem 4.11) is the only model,
computable or not, of its computable inﬁnitary theory; we say that its computable inﬁnitary
theory is countably categorical. On the other hand the Harrison linear order, which has
Scott rank ωCK
1
+ 1, is not the only model of its computable inﬁnitary theory. Millar and
16


Sacks [MS08] asked whether there is a computable structure of Scott rank ωCK
1
such that
the computable inﬁnitary theory is not countably categorical. This is equivalent to ﬁnding a
structure of Scott complexity ΠωCK
1
+1. (In one direction, if the computable inﬁnitary theory
of a computable structure is countably categorical, then the structure has a ΠωCK
1
Scott
sentence, namely the conjunction of all the computable sentences true of it. The converse is
slightly more diﬃcult; see [AGHTT].)
Millar and Sacks [MS08] produced such a structure A which is not hyperarithmetic, but
which does have ωA
1 = ωCK
1
. Freer [Fre08] proved the analogous result higher up: for any
admissible α, there is a structure A with ωA
1 = α and A has Scott complexity ΠωA
1 +1. Finally,
Harrison-Trainor, Igusa, and Knight [HTIK18] constructed a computable example.
Theorem 4.15 (Harrison-Trainor, Igusa, and Knight [HTIK18]). There is a computable
structure with Scott complexity ΠωCK
1
+1.
There are two remaining complexities, ΣωCK
1
+1 and d−ΠωCK
1
+1. These are exactly the
structures with the property that they have Scott rank ωCK
1
+1, but after naming a constant,
they have Scott rank ωCK
1
. This follows from Theorem 3.2 and the following corresponding
result for d−Σα sentences:
Theorem 4.16 (Alvir, Greenberg, Harrison-Trainor, and Turetsky [AGHTT]). Let A be a
countable structure. Then A has a d−Σα Scott sentence if and only if for some ¯c ∈A, (A, ¯c)
has a Πα Scott sentence and the automorphism orbit of ¯c in A is Σα-deﬁnable.
Turetsky asked whether such structures exist.
Alvir, Greenberg, Harrison-Trainor, and
Turetsky [AGHTT] showed that they do. Thus there are computable structures of all ﬁve
possible high Scott complexities.
Theorem 4.17 (Alvir, Greenberg, Harrison-Trainor, and Turetsky [AGHTT]). There are
computable structures of all possible high Scott complexities: ΠωCK
1
, ΠωCK
1
+1, ΣωCK
1
+1, d−ΠωCK
1
+1,
and ΠωCK
1
+2.
4.3
Computably approximable structures
Theorem 4.8 says that two computable structures that satisfy the same computable inﬁnitary
formulas are isomorphic. Thus the computable inﬁnitary theory of a computable structure
characterizes the structure among computable structures. (If a computable structure does
not have a countably categorical computably inﬁnitary theory, for example the Harrison
linear order or the structure of Theorem 4.15, then the other models of its computable
inﬁnitary theory are necessarily non-computable.) If we restrict our attention to computable
structures only, is there a single sentence characterizing every computable structure? We
call such a sentence a pseudo-Scott sentence.
Deﬁnition 4.18. Let A be a computable structure. A pseudo-Scott sentence for A is a
sentence whose computable models are just the computable copies of A.
Calvert and Knight [CK06] asked whether every computable structure has a computable
inﬁnitary pseudo-Scott sentence.
Such a structure would have to be of high Scott rank,
as structures of computable Scott rank have computable Scott sentences, and any Scott
sentence is a pseudo-Scott sentence.
17


Question 4.19 (Calvert and Knight [CK06]). Is there a computable structure of noncom-
putable Scott rank with a computable inﬁnitary pseudo-Scott sentence?
This question is still open. A structure without a computable Scott sentence is said to
be weakly computably approximable.
Deﬁnition 4.20. A computable structure A of non-computable rank is weakly computably
approximable if every computable inﬁnitary sentence ϕ true in A is also true in some com-
putable B ≇A.
The Harrison linear order has the property that any computable sentence true of it is
also true of some other structure which is not just computable, but which has computable
Scott rank. Moreover, the Harrison order has the following stronger property:
Deﬁnition 4.21. A computable structure A of high Scott rank is strongly computably ap-
proximable if for all Σ1
1 sets S, there is a uniformly computable sequence (Cn) such that if
n ∈S, then Cn ≅A, and if n ∉S, then Cn has computable Scott rank.
One can see that the Harrison order is strongly computably approximable by a simple mod-
iﬁcation of the construction given earlier.
Calvert, Knight, and Millar also showed that there is also such a structure of Scott rank
ωCK
1
. This can also be seen using our construction for Theorem 4.11 combined with the fact
that the Harrison order is strongly computably approximable.
Theorem 4.22 (Calvert, Knight, and Millar [CKM06]). There is a computable tree T of
Scott rank ωCK
1
that is strongly computably approximable.
This theorem is very useful for other constructions; for example it was used in the proofs of
Theorems 4.15 and 4.17.
Not every computable structure of high Scott rank is strongly computable approximable;
indeed, there is a single computable sentence all of whose models have high Scott rank.
Theorem 4.23 (Harrison-Trainor [HT18]). For α = ωCK
1
or α = ωCK
1
+ 1 : There is a
computable model A of Scott rank α and a Πc
2 sentence ψ such that A ⊧ψ, and whenever B
is any structure and B ⊧ψ, B has Scott rank α.
Another application of the existence of strongly computably approximable structures is
a computation of the index set complexity of being of high Scott rank.
Theorem 4.24 (Calvert, Fokina, Goncharov, Knight, Kudinov, Morozov, and Puzarenko
[CFG+07]). The index set
{i ∶Ai has high Scott rank}
of computable structures with high Scott rank is Π1
1 m-complete.
They also computed the complexity of the index sets of computable structures of Scott rank
ωCK
1
and ωCK
1
+ 1; these are complete for diﬀerences of Π1
1 sets and diﬀerences of Σ1
1 sets
respectively.
18


4.4
Computable categoricity and high Scott complexity
A computable structure A is said to be computably categorical if whenever B ≅A is a
computable copy of A, there is a computable isomorphism from A to B. For a long time, an
important problem was to characterize the structures which are computably categorical. It
turned out that the more well-behaved notion was that of relative computable categoricity:
a computable structure A is relatively computably categorical if for every copy B of A, not
necessarily computable, there is an isomorphism from A to B computable from B. Relative
computable categoricity is characterised by the following theorem:
Theorem 4.25 (Ash, Knight, Mannasse, and Slaman [AKMS89]; Chisholm [Chi90]). A
computable structure A is relatively computably categorical if and only if it has a computable
Σ1 Scott family: there is a tuple ¯c of constants and a c.e. collection Φ of computable Σ1
formulas such that
1. each tuple ¯a in A satisﬁes ϕ(¯a, ¯c) for some formula ϕ ∈Φ; and
2. whenever two tuples ¯a and ¯b in A satisfy the same formula ϕ(⋅, ¯c) from Φ, there is an
automorphism of A taking ¯a to ¯b.
It is not hard to see that if A has a computable Σ1 Scott family, then it is relatively com-
putably categorical; the other direction is a forcing argument. So in some sense if a structure
is relatively computably categorical, then there is a good structural reason for this.
As for (plain) computable categoricity, in certain classes there are good structural ways to
determine whether a structure is computably categorical—e.g., a linear order is computably
categorical if and only if it has ﬁnitely many adjacencies [GD80]—but there is no good
characterization in general. Goncharov [Gon77a] showed that there are structures that are
computably categorical but not relatively computably categorical. Later, Downey, Kach,
Lempp, Lewis, Montalb´an, and Turetsky [DKL+15] showed that the set of (indices for)
computably categorical structures is Π1
1 m-complete; this can be interpreted as meaning
that there is no good characterization of computable categoricity that is simpler than the
naive deﬁnition. As part of this proof, they constructed for each computable ordinal α < ωCK
1
a computably categorical structure A which is not relatively ∆0α-categorical, i.e., it is not the
case that for every B ≅A there is an isomorphism from A to B which is ∆0α in B.
This left a gap: Is every computably categorical structure ∆0
α-categorical for some com-
putable ordinal α < ωCK
1
? Or even, is every computably categorical structure ∆1
1-categorical?
(A structure is relatively ∆1
1-categorical if for every B ≅A there is an isomorphism from A to
B which is ∆1
1 in B.) If A is a computable structure of computable Scott rank α < ωCK
1
, then
it is relatively ∆0
α⋅2-categorical; this follows from a similar argument as Theorem 4.8. In the
other direction, one can argue that a computable structure which is relatively ∆1
1-categorical
must have computable Scott rank. (See Proposition 1 of [Tur].) So a computable structure is
relatively ∆1
1-categorical if and only if it has computable Scott rank. Turetsky [Tur] showed:
Theorem 4.26 (Turetsky [Tur]). There is a computably categorical structure which has high
Scott complexity and thus is not relatively ∆1
1-categorical.
Turetsky was also able to adapt this construction to build a structure of computable dimen-
sion 2:
19


Theorem 4.27 (Turetsky [Tur]). There is a structure of computable dimension 2 with two
computable copies which are not hyperarithmetically isomorphic. This structure has high
Scott complexity.
This is of particular interest because up until Turetsky’s construction the only existing
constructions [Gon77b, CGKS99, HKS03] of a structure of computable dimension 2, using a
method called the special component technique, build two computable copies which are not
computably isomorphic, but which are ∆0
3 isomorphic.
5
Scott Complexity for Certain Structures
Scott complexity gives a good measuring stick for studying particular structures that we are
interested in. Scott complexity measures the diﬃculty of characterizing a structure up to iso-
morphism, as well as (using Theorem 2.8) the diﬃculty of understanding the automorphisms
of the structure, and computing isomorphisms between diﬀerent copies of the structure. By
ﬁnding the Scott complexity of a particular structure, we come to understand the simplest
way of characterizing it. Moreover, the problem of computing the Scott complexity of a
structure gives us a way of testing our understanding that structure; indeed, one of the
longstanding open questions is:
Question 5.1. What is the Scott complexity of the pure transcendental ﬁeld Q(x1,x2,...)?
This highlights the fact that we do not have a good understanding of pure transcendence
bases, i.e. transcendence bases which also generate the ﬁeld extension. In contrast, Nielson
transformations give us an excellent understanding of bases for free groups, allowing us to
compute their Scott complexity; see Theorem 5.7 below.
To compute the Scott complexity of a structure, one usually writes down a Scott sentence
of a particular complexity, and then one proves a lower bound showing that that complexity
is optimal. So, for example, one might write down a Σ4 Scott sentence for a structure A,
and then give a Wadge reduction f from a Σ0
4-complete set S to Iso(A), i.e. a continuous
operator f such that if x ∈S then f(X) ≅A, and if x ∉S then f(x) ≇A.
Much of the literature takes the approach of using index sets rather than Wadge reduc-
tions.
Deﬁnition 5.2. Fix a listing Mi of the partial computable structures in the language of A.
Then
IA = {i ∈ω ∶Mi ≅A}
is the index set of A.
If A has a Scott sentence which is a computable Σα sentence then IA will be of complexity
Σ0α as a subset of ω. The same is true for Πα and Π0α, and d−Σα and d−Σ0α as well. So if we
can prove, for example, that Iso(A) is Σ0
α m-complete, then A cannot have a computable
Πα Scott sentence.
This strategy does not always work. Knight and McCoy [KM14] showed that there is a
structure (a particular subgroup of Q) for which the index set is m-complete d−Σ0
α, but there
20


is no computable d−Σα Scott sentence. The structure does however have an X-computable
d−Σα Scott sentence, for a particular low c.e. set X used to build the subgroup. So at the
computable level, the index set complexity and the Scott complexity do not always match
up. To ﬁx this, we must relativize.
Deﬁnition 5.3. Fix a listing MX
i
of the partial X-computable structures in the language
of A. Then
IX
A = {i ∈ω ∶MX
i ≅A}
is the index set of A relative to X.
So for example to show that A does not have any Scott sentence which is Πα or simpler, we
must show that there is a set X such that for every Y ≥T X, the index set IY
A relative to Y is
ΣY
α m-complete. This essentially works out to the same things as giving a Wadge reduction.
Theorem 5.4 (Calvert, Harizanov, Knight, and Miller [CHKM06]; Calvert [Cal04]). Let A
be a Q-vector space. Then:
1. If dim(A) = 1, then A has Scott complexity Π2.
2. If ∞> dim(A) > 1, then A has Scott complexity d−Σ2.
3. If dim(A) = ∞, then A has Scott complexity Π3.
Theorem 5.5 (Calvert [Cal04]). Let A be an class of algebraically closed ﬁeld. Then:
1. If A has ﬁnite transcendence degree, then A has Scott complexity d−Σ2.
2. If A has inﬁnite transcendence degree, then A has Scott complexity Π3.
Both of these classes are examples of strongly minimal theories and hence admit a prege-
ometry of algebraic closure. Csima, Harrison-Trainor, and Mohammad (unpublished) have
shown that the hardness portion of the results above are consequences of the existence of this
pregeometry. Other classes of structures also admit a pregeometry with the right properties;
another example is the class of real closed ordered ﬁelds. Calvert, Harizanov, Knight, and
Miller [CHKM06] ﬁrst computed the complexity of Archimedean real closed ordered ﬁelds.
Theorem 5.6 (Calvert, Harizanov, Knight, and Miller [CHKM06]). Let A be an Archimedean
real closed ordered ﬁeld.
1. If the transcendence degree is 0, then A has Scott complexity Π2.
2. If the transcendence degree of A is ﬁnite but not 0, then A has Scott complexity d−Σ2.
3. If the transcendence degree of A is inﬁnite, then A has Scott complexity Π3.
They also prove a number of results on reduced abelian p-groups.
Groups have been a very fruitful area for proving interesting results about Scott com-
plexity.
This began with free groups, where Carson, Harizanov, Knight, Lange, McCoy,
Morozov, Quinn, Safranski, and Wallbaum [CHK+12] and McCoy and Wallbaum [MW12]
used Nielson transformations to compute the Scott complexities of free groups on various
generators.
21


Theorem 5.7 ([CHK+12], [MW12]).
1. For n ≥1, the free group Fn on n generators has Scott complexity d−Σ2.
2. The free group F∞on inﬁnitely many generators has Scott complexity Π4.
Knight and Saraph [KS18] continued the study of the Scott complexity of groups by
looking at torsion-free abelian groups of ﬁnite rank and ﬁnitely generated groups. For groups
of ﬁnite rank, Knight and Saraph show that there is always a Σ3 Scott sentence.
Theorem 5.8 (Knight and Saraph [KS18]). Let G be a torsion-free abelian group of ﬁnite
rank. Then G has a Σ3 Scott sentence.
Moreover, they show that there are computable torsion-free abelian groups of rank one which
have Scott complexity Σ3.
Theorem 5.9 (Knight and Saraph [KS18]). If G is a subgroup of Q in which 1 is not
inﬁnitely divisible by any prime, but in which 1 is ﬁnitely divisible by inﬁnitely many primes,
then G has Scott complexity Σ3.
One can also analyse the computability of these Scott sentences; see [KS18] as well as [Ho17].
Knight and Saraph also show that every ﬁnitely generated group has a Σ3 Scott sentence,
and indeed the same proof works for structures of any language.
Theorem 5.10 (Knight and Saraph [KS18]). Every ﬁnitely generated structure has a Σ3
Scott sentence.
By Theorem 5.7 above, every ﬁnitely generated free group has a d−Σ2 Scott sentence. More-
over, the same is true of any ﬁnitely generated abelian group and of the dihedral group.
Theorem 5.11 (Knight and Saraph [KS18]). Every ﬁnitely generated abelian group has a
d−Σ2 Scott sentence.
Theorem 5.12 (Knight and Saraph [KS18]). The inﬁnite dihedral group has Scott complexity
d−Σ2.
Next, Ho [Ho17] showed that polycyclic groups (which include nilpotent groups and abelian
groups) and certain solvable groups also all have computable d−Σ0
2 Scott sentence.
Theorem 5.13 (Ho [Ho17]). Every ﬁnitely generated polycyclic group has a d−Σ2 Scott
sentence.
At the time, every ﬁnitely generated group that had been checked had a d−Σ2 Scott sentence,
and so Knight and Saraph asked whether every ﬁnitely generated group has a d−Σ2 Scott
sentence. Harrison-Trainor and Ho [HTH18] answered this question by showing that there
is a ﬁnitely generated group with no d−Σ2 Scott sentence and hence with Scott complexity
Σ3.
Theorem 5.14 (Harrison-Trainor and Ho [HTH18]). There is a ﬁnitely-generated com-
putable group with Scott complexity Σ3.
22


Thus the upper bound given by Theorem 5.10 is best possible.
The proof of this last theorem relied on a characterizations using a number of diﬀerent
equivalent conditions on when a ﬁnitely generated structure has a d−Σ2 Scott sentence.
Theorem 5.15 (A. Miller [Mil83], Harrison-Trainor and Ho [HTH18], Alvir, Knight, and
McCoy [AKMC20]). Let A be a ﬁnitely generated structure. The following are equivalent:
1. A has a d−Σ2 Scott sentence.
2. A has a Π3 Scott sentence.
3. A is the only model of its Σ2 theory.
4. some generating tuple of A is deﬁned by a Π1 formula.
5. every generating tuple of A is deﬁned by a Π1 formula.
6. A does not contain a copy of itself as a proper Σ1-elementary substructure.
(2) is due to A. Miller [Mil83], (3) is due to Harrison-Trainor and Ho [HTH21], (4) and (5)
are due to Alvir, Knight, and McCoy [AKMC20], and (6) is due to Harrison-Trainor and Ho
[HTH18]. It is condition (6) which seems to be the most useful for constructing examples, as
it has a more semantic ﬂavour. Alvir, Knight, and McCoy also have a nice characterization
of when a structure has a computable d−Σ2 Scott sentence.
Theorem 5.16 (Alvir, Knight, and McCoy [AKMC20]). Let A be a ﬁnitely generated struc-
ture. The following are equivalent:
1. A has a computable d−Σ2 Scott sentence.
2. some generating tuple of A is deﬁned by a computable Π1 formula.
3. every generating tuple of A is deﬁned by a computable Π1 formula.
There are indeed computable structures with a d−Σ2 Scott sentence, but no computable
d−Σ2 Scott sentence; for example Theorem 2.8 of [HT] gives an example of a computable
ﬁnitely generated principal ideal domain which, as a module over itself, has a d−Σ2 Scott
sentence but no computable d−Σ2 Scott sentence.
These general tools give us a way to study Scott complexity in other classes of ﬁnitely
generated structures. The known result are shown in the table below. Those results which
have not yet been cited are due to Harrison-Trainor and Ho [HTH18] and Harrison-Trainor
[HT].
Some structure has no d−Σ2 Scott sentence
Every structure has a d−Σ2 Scott sentence
Rings
Commutative rings
Modules
Modules over Noetherian rings
Fields
Vector spaces
Groups
Abelian groups
Free groups
Torsion-free hyperbolic groups
23


One important class of structures for which we do not know the answer is ﬁnitely presented
groups.
Question 5.17 (Question 1.7 of [HTH18] and Question 1 of [AKMC20]). Does every ﬁnitely
presented group have a d−Σ2 Scott sentence?
The best progress towards answering this question is in [HT]. There, Harrison-Trainor proves
the following purely group-theoretic characterization of the ﬁnitely presented groups with a
d−Σ2 Scott sentence:
Theorem 5.18 (Harrison-Trainor [HT]). Let G be a ﬁnitely presented group.
Then the
following are equivalent:
1. G does not have a d−Σ2 Scott sentence,
2. G contains a proper subgroup H ≅G with the property that for every ﬁnite set of non-
identity elements a1,... ,an ∈G, there is a normal subgroup H′ ⊆G such that G = H′⋊H
and a1,... ,ak ∉H′.
One can immediately see from this that any ﬁnitely presented Hopﬁan group has a d−Σ2 Scott
sentence. (A Hopﬁan group is one which is not isomorphic to any of its proper quotients.)
This includes cases such as ﬁnitely generated abelian groups and free groups for which we
already knew this, as well as a few new examples such as ﬁnitely presented residually ﬁnite
groups and torsion-free hyperbolic groups.
We can also show that the Baumslag-Solitar
groups B(1,n), which were originally constructed speciﬁcally as examples of non-Hopﬁan
ﬁnitely generated groups, have d−Σ2 Scott sentences.
Paolini [Pao] gave a suﬃcient condition, a weakening of Hopﬁanity, for an arbitrary
ﬁnitely presented structure to have a d−Σ2 Scott sentence. We say that A is quasi-Hopﬁan
if there is a ﬁnite generating set ¯a of A such that whenever f∶A →A is a surjective homo-
morphism of A which is injective on ¯a, f is injective.
Theorem 5.19 (Paolini [Pao]). Let A be a ﬁnitely presented structure. If A is quasi-Hopﬁan,
then A has a d−Σ2 Scott sentence.
Paolini also gives a condition on the automorphism group of a quasi-Hopﬁan computable
structure which is suﬃcient to have a computable d−Σ2 Scott sentence. Paolini applies this
to show that the free projective plane of rank 4, which is quasi-Hopﬁan but not Hopﬁan, has
a computable d-Σ2 Scott sentence. He also considers Coxeter groups of ﬁnite rank; these are
Hopﬁan, and hence have d−Σ2 Scott sentences, but it takes more work to show that these
Scott sentences are computable.
The complexity of saying that a structure is ﬁnitely generated is Σ3. When a ﬁnitely
generated structure has Scott complexity Σ3, is this just because it is Σ3 to say that it
is ﬁnitely generated? Or is the complexity of picking out the structure from among other
ﬁnitely generated structures actually Σ3? We can ask the analogous question whenever the
complexity of a structure in a class K is the same or less than the complexity of K. For such
cases, we would like to separate the complexity of describing the class of structure from the
complexity of describing the structure inside of the class.
24


Deﬁnition 5.20. Let A be a structure in a class K. We say that ϕ is a quasi Scott sentence
for A within K if, for countable B ∈K,
B ⊧ϕ ⇐⇒B ≅A.
The Scott complexity of A within K is Γ ∈{Σα,Πα,d−Σα} if Γ is the least complexity of a
quasi Scott sentence for A within K.
To prove an upper bound, we just need to exhibit a quasi Scott sentence. We again prove
lower bounds using a reduction. For example, to show that A has Scott complexity at least
Σα within K, we give a Wadge reduction f from a Σ0
α-complete set S to Iso(A) with the
additional property that f(x) ∈K for all x.
For ﬁnitely generated structures, we have the following interesting result:
Theorem 5.21 (Harrison-Trainor and Ho [HTH21]). Every ﬁnitely generated structure has
a Π3 quasi-Scott sentence within the class of ﬁnitely generated structures.
Recall that this means that for each ﬁnitely generated structure A, there is a Π3 sentence
ϕ such that A is the only ﬁnitely generated model of ϕ. In [HTH21], Harrison-Trainor and
Ho prove that there are ﬁnitely generated groups with no d−Σ2 quasi Scott sentence within
the class of ﬁnitely generated structures. Thus the analogue for quasi Scott sentences of
Theorem 3.3 is not true: if a structure has a Σ3 and a Π3 quasi Scott sentence within the
class of ﬁnitely generated structure, it is not necessarily true that it has a d−Σ2 quasi Scott
sentence. There are two questions that are still open about quasi Scott sentences:
Question 5.22 (Question 5.7 of [HTH18]). Give a characterization of the ﬁnitely generated
structures which have a d−Σ2 quasi Scott sentence within the class of ﬁnitely generated
structures.
Question 5.23 (See Section 5.3 of [HTH21]). Is there a ﬁnitely generated structure with
a d−Σ2 quasi Scott sentence within the class of ﬁnitely generated structures, but no d−Σ2
Scott sentence?
Recall from Theorem 5.7 that the free group F∞on inﬁnitely many generators has Scott
complexity Π4. McCoy and Walbaum [MW12] show that the class of free groups is axiom-
atizable by a Π4 sentence. Within this class, F∞is simpler to describe. (F1 and F2 also
become simpler to describe within this class.)
Theorem 5.24 ([CHK+12], [MW12]).
Let FG be the class of free groups.
1. The free group F1 ≅Z on one generator has Scott complexity Π1 within FG.
2. The free group F2 on two generators has Scott complexity Π2 within FG.
3. For n > 2, the free group Fn on n generators has Scott complexity d−Σ0
2 within FG.
4. The free group F∞on inﬁnitely many generators has Scott complexity Π3 within FG.
25


Quasi Scott sentences are also useful for talking about very simple structures, such as
the 1-dimensional Q-vector space; then Theorem 5.4 below says that the Scott complexity
of V is Π2. However even just saying that V is a vector space is already Π2; perhaps all the
complexity is in saying that V is a vector space, and it is simpler than that to say that a
vector space is 1-dimensional? However Calvert, Harizanov, Knight, and Miller [CHKM06]
show that the 1-dimensional Q-vector space has Scott complexity Π2 within the class of
Q-vector spaces.
Quasi Scott sentences within the class of ﬁnitely generated structures are similar to
quasi-ﬁnite axiomatizability. A structure is quasi-ﬁnitely axiomatizable if there is a sentence
ϕ of ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order logic such that the structure is the only ﬁnitely generated structure
satisfying ϕ, that is, if it has a ﬁnitary quasi Scott sentence within the class of ﬁnitely
generated structures. See the survey [Nie07].
6
Theories
Given an Lω1ω sentence ϕ we can think of ϕ as a theory deﬁning the class {A ∶A ⊧ϕ}.
This generalizes the notion of an elementary ﬁrst-order theory, as given such a theory T, the
conjunction ⋀T of all the sentences in T is an Lω1ω sentence.
6.1
Vaught’s conjecture
As previously mentioned, we give only the briefest overview of Vaught’s conjecture and its
connections with Scott sentences.
A central question in model theory is given a theory T, how many countable models can
T have? The continuum hypothesis would imply that if T has inﬁnitely many countable
models, then it can only have countably many or continuum many countable models. In
descriptive set theory, one often ﬁnds (e.g., for analytic sets) that even without the continuum
hypothesis, one can prove that naturally occurring sets must have cardinality countable or
continuum. Vaught’s conjecture [Vau61] asks whether this is true for the number of countable
models of a theory.
Conjecture 6.1 (Vaught). The number of countable models of an elementary ﬁrst-order
theory is either countable or continuum.
It is natural to extend this to theories given by sentences of Lω1ω.
Morley was able to eliminate almost all of the other possibilities.
Theorem 6.2 (Morley [Mor70]). The number of countable models of an elementary ﬁrst-
order theory is either ℵ0, ℵ1, or continuum.
The standard proof of this theorem rests on what is called the Scott analysis together with
Silver’s theorem. The Scott analysis looks at the back-and-forth relations on all of the models
of the theory, or, as in [Mar02], the analysis as in Deﬁnition 2.7. This gives a level-by-level
splitting of the models of the theory, e.g., at level α one splits the models into ≡α-classes.
Silver’s theorem says that co-analytic equivalence relations have either countably many or
continuum many equivalence classes [Sil80]. So at each level α there are either countably
26


many or continuum many equivalence classes.
If the theory has fewer continuum-many
models, at each level α there must only be countably many equivalence classes of models.
Then there are ω1 levels, hence at most ℵ1 countable models.
Of course Vaught’s conjecture is automatically true if the continuum hypothesis is. Thus
Vaught’s conjecture is often stated in a way that is independent of the continuum hypothesis.
We say a sentence ϕ of Lω1ω is scattered if it does not have a perfect set of countable models
(in the space Mod(L)). Then one can state Vaught’s conjecture as saying that any scattered
theory has countably many countable models. Using the Scott analysis, one can show:
Theorem 6.3. The following are equivalent:
1. ϕ is scattered,
2. for each countable α, there are only countably many ≡α-equivalence classes of models
of ϕ,
3. for each countable α, there are only countably many models of ϕ of Scott rank less than
α.
The Scott analysis, though not necessarily Scott rank or complexity, plays a central role
in a large body of results about what a counterexample to Vaught’s conjecture would have to
look like. Often, these results are about the uncountable models of the theory. One example
mentioning Scott rank explicitly is:
Theorem 6.4 (Harrington). A counterexample to Vaught’s Conjecture has models of arbi-
trarily large Scott rank below ω2.
In this theorem, we need the Scott rank for uncountable structures, e.g., by extending the
Scott ranks based on back-and-forth relations. Harrington’s proof was never published, but
recently new proofs have independently been given by Baldwin, Friedman, Koerwien, and
Laskowski [BFKL16], Knight, Montalb´an, and Schweber [KMS16], and Larson [Lar17].
Montalb´an showed that there are computability-theoretic ways of stating Vaught’s con-
jecture; the proof also uses an analysis of the back-and-forth relations.
Theorem 6.5 (ZFC+PD; Montalb´an [Mon13]). Let ϕ be an Lω1ω sentence with uncountably
many countable models. The following are equivalent:
(V1) ϕ is a counterexample to Vaught’s conjecture.
(V2) ϕ satisﬁes hyperarithmetic-is-recursive on a cone, i.e., for all suﬃciently powerful or-
acles X, any hyperarithmetic-in-X model of ϕ has an X-computable copy.
(V3) There is an oracle relative to which,
{Sp(A) ∶A ⊧ϕ} = {{X ∈2ω ∶ωX
1 ≥α} ∶α ∈ω1}.
As an example of an open question relating Scott rank and Vaught’s conjecture, we have:
Question 6.6 (Montalb´an, Berkeley Vaught’s Conjecture Workshop). A minimal theory T
has the property that for any Lω1ω-sentence ϕ, exactly one of T ∧ϕ or T ∧¬ϕ has models of
arbitrarily high Scott rank. Does the existence of a minimal theory imply the existence of a
counterexample to Vaught’s conjecture?
27


6.2
Scott spectra
The results of this section were proved using the notion of Scott rank deﬁned using symmetric
back-and-forth relations (as in Deﬁnition 2.5) except with arbitrary tuples, replacing (2) of
that deﬁnition with:
(2) For α > 0, ¯a ∼α ¯b if for each β < α and ¯d there is ¯c such that ¯a¯c ∼β ¯b ¯d, and for all ¯c there
is ¯d such that ¯a¯c ∼β ¯b ¯d.
It is likely that the same or similar results can be proved for any of the deﬁnitions of Scott
rank.
Let ϕ be a Π2 sentence which we think of as a theory. Many natural theories are of
this form, e.g. most algebraic classes of interest such as algebraically closed ﬁelds or torsion
groups.
Montalb´an asked whether there must be a model of ϕ of somewhat low Scott
complexity, say Scott rank 2 or less. One might expect that it would be possible to construct
a model of any Π2 theory without introducing any complicated types, resulting in a structure
of low Scott rank. This turns out not to be the case; surprisingly, there are Π2 Scott sentences
all of whose models are very complicated.
Theorem 6.7 (Harrison-Trainor [HT18]). Fix α < ω1. There is a Π2 sentence T whose
models all have Scott rank α.
More generally, we can consider the collection of Scott ranks of all of the models of ϕ.
Deﬁnition 6.8. Let ϕ be an Lω1ω sentence. The Scott spectrum of ϕ is the collection
{SR(A) ∶A is countable and A ⊧ϕ}
of Scott ranks of countable models of ϕ.
There are many natural questions about Scott spectra. For example, what kind of gaps can
one have—for which α < β can a theory have models of Scott rank α and β, but no models
of Scott rank in between? Is there any relation between the complexity of the theory and
the possible Scott spectrum? The following result of Sacks says that the Scott spectrum of
a class is either bounded, or the class contains models of high Scott rank.
Theorem 6.9 (Sacks [Sac83]). Let ϕ be an Lω1ω sentence. Suppose that the Scott rank of
M is ≤ωM,ϕ
1
for all countable models M of ϕ. Then there is α < ωϕ
1 such that the Scott rank
of every model of ϕ is at most α.
Harrison-Trainor [HT18] gave a complete descriptive set-theoretic classiﬁcation of the
possible Scott spectra. To give this characterization, we need a few deﬁnitions.
Deﬁnition 6.10. Let (L,≤) be a linear order. The well-founded part wf(L) of L is the
largest initial segment of L which is well-founded. The well-founded collapse of L, wfc(L), is
the order type of L after we collapse the non-well-founded part L∖wf(L) to a single element.
We can identify α ∈wf(L) with the ordinal which is the order type of {β ∈L ∶β < α}. We
can also identify wf(L) with its order type. If L is well-founded, with order type α, then
wfc(L) = wf(L) = α. If L is not well-founded, wfc(L) = wf(L)+1. We extend these operations
to collections of linear orders by applying to operation to each order in the collection.
Then we get the following characterization of the Scott spectra:
28


Theorem 6.11 (Harrison-Trainor [HT18]; ZFC + PD). The Scott spectra of Lω1ω-sentences
are exactly the sets of the form:
1. wf(C),
2. wfc(C), or
3. wf(C) ∪wfc(C)
where C is a Σ1
1 class of linear orders of ω.
The more diﬃcult and most useful part of this characterization is to show that each such
collection of ordinals is the Scott spectrum of a theory. This direction is provable within
ZFC and does not use the set-theoretic assumption of projective determinacy. One can use
this direction to construct interesting examples of Scott spectra, such as the collection of
successor ordinals, or the collection of admissible ordinals.
Harrison-Trainor also proved that Π2 theories are enough to get all of the Scott spectra.
Theorem 6.12 (Harrison-Trainor [HT18]). Each Scott spectrum is the Scott spectrum of a
Πin
2 sentence.
For example, for every pair of ordinals α < β, {α,β} is a Scott spectrum.
6.3
Scott height
Of the countably many computable Lω1ω sentences, some of them have a Scott spectrum
which is unbounded below ω1, and others are bounded below ω1.
Since there are only
countably many computable sentences, of all those that are bounded below ω1, there must
be some countable ordinal which is the least common upper bound for all of them. Using
Lcω1ω for the computable Lω1ω sentences, we deﬁne:
Deﬁnition 6.13. The Scott height sh(Lc
ω1ω) of Lc
ω1ω is the least ordinal α < ω1 such that if
ϕ is a computable Lω1ω sentence whose Scott spectrum is bounded below ω1, then the Scott
spectrum of ϕ is bounded below α.
The Scott height is a way of measuring how far up the ordinals the computable sentences
can “reach”.
Sacks and Marker made signiﬁcant progress towards computing the Scott height of Lcω1ω.
Sacks [Sac83] showed that sh(Lc
ω1,ω) ≤δ1
2, where δ1
2 is the least ordinal which has no ∆1
2
presentation. Marker [Mar90] was able to resolve this question for pseudo-elementary classes.
Deﬁnition 6.14. A class C of structures in a language L is an Lω1ω-pseudo-elementary class
(PCLω1ω-class) if there is an Lω1ω-sentence ϕ in an expanded language L′ ⊇L such that the
structures in C are the reducts to L of the models of ϕ. C is a computable PCLω1ω-class if ϕ
is a computable sentence.
We can deﬁne the Scott height of PCLω1ω in a similar way to the Scott height of Lcω1ω, except
that now we consider all Lω1ω-pseudo-elementary classes which are the reducts of the models
of a computable sentence. Marker [Mar90] showed that sh(PCc
Lω1ω) = δ1
2. Finally, Harrison-
Trainor [HT18] showed that every Scott spectrum of a pseudo-elementary Lω1ω-class is the
Scott spectrum of an Lω1ω-sentence.
29


Theorem 6.15 (Harrison-Trainor [HT18]). Every Scott spectrum of a pseudo-elementary
Lω1ω-class is the Scott spectrum of an Lω1ω-sentence. Moreover, every Scott spectrum of
a computable pseudo-elementary Lω1ω-class is the Scott spectrum of a computable Lω1ω-
sentence.
Combined, all of these results allow us to compute the Scott height.
Corollary 6.16 (Sacks [Sac83], Marker [Mar90], Harrison-Trainor [HT18]). sh(Lc
ω1,ω) = δ1
2.
Marker also studies Scott heights for other types of classes. We say that a class is co-
pseudo-elementary Lω1ω, or cPCLω1ω, if it is the complement of a pseudo-elementary class.
Then Marker [Mar90] shows that:
Theorem 6.17 (Marker [Mar90]). We have:
sh(cPCLω1ω) = γ1
2.
Here, γ1
2 is the least ordinal such that any non-empty Π1
2 class of ordinals contains an ordinal
below γ1
2. (By a Π1
2 class of ordinals, we mean a Π1
2 class of presentations of linear orders on
domain ω.) We have γ1
2 > δ1
2.
References
[AGHTT]
Rachel Alvir, Noam Greenberg, Matthew Harrison-Trainor, and Dan Turetsky.
Scott complexity of countable structures. preprint.
[AK00]
C. J. Ash and J. Knight.
Computable structures and the hyperarithmetical
hierarchy, volume 144 of Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics.
North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 2000.
[AKMC20]
Rachael Alvir, Julia F. Knight, and Charles McCoy CSC. Complexity of Scott
sentences. Fund. Math., 251(2):109–129, 2020.
[AKMS89]
Chris Ash, Julia Knight, Mark Manasse, and Theodore Slaman. Generic copies
of countable structures. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 42(3):195–205, 1989.
[Bec17]
Howard Becker. Strange structures from computable model theory. Notre Dame
J. Form. Log., 58(1):97–105, 2017.
[Bec20]
Howard Becker. Assigning an isomorphism type to a hyperdegree. J. Symb.
Log., 85(1):325–337, 2020.
[BFKL16]
John T. Baldwin, Sy D. Friedman, Martin Koerwien, and Michael C. Laskowski.
Three red herrings around Vaught’s conjecture.
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
368(5):3673–3694, 2016.
[BYDNT17] Ita¨ı Ben Yaacov, Michal Doucha, Andr´e Nies, and Todor Tsankov. Metric Scott
analysis. Adv. Math., 318:46–87, 2017.
30


[Cal04]
Wesley Calvert.
The isomorphism problem for classes of computable ﬁelds.
Arch. Math. Logic, 43(3):327–336, 2004.
[CC20]
William Chan and Ruiyuan Chen. Bounds on continuous Scott rank. Proc.
Amer. Math. Soc., 148(8):3591–3605, 2020.
[CFG+07]
W. Calvert, E. Fokina, S. S. Goncharov, J. F. Knight, O. Kudinov, A. S.
Morozov, and V. Puzarenko. Index sets for classes of high rank structures. J.
Symbolic Logic, 72(4):1418–1432, 2007.
[CGKS99]
Peter Cholak, Sergey Goncharov, Bakhadyr Khoussainov, and Richard A.
Shore.
Computably categorical structures and expansions by constants.
J.
Symbolic Logic, 64(1):13–37, 1999.
[Cha]
William Chan. Bounds on scott ranks of some polish metric spaces. preprint.
[Cha17]
William Chan. The countable admissible ordinal equivalence relation. Ann.
Pure Appl. Logic, 168(6):1224–1246, 2017.
[Chi90]
John Chisholm. Eﬀective model theory vs. recursive model theory. J. Symbolic
Logic, 55(3):1168–1191, 1990.
[CHK+12]
J. Carson, V. Harizanov, J. Knight, K. Lange, C. McCoy, A. Morozov, S. Quinn,
C. Safranski, and J. Wallbaum. Describing free groups. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc., 364(11):5715–5728, 2012.
[CHKM06]
W. Calvert, V. S. Harizanov, J. F. Knight, and S. Miller. Index sets of com-
putable models. Algebra Logika, 45(5):538–574, 631–632, 2006.
[CK06]
Wesley Calvert and Julia F. Knight. Classiﬁcation from a computable view-
point. Bull. Symbolic Logic, 12(2):191–218, 2006.
[CKM06]
Wesley Calvert, Julia F. Knight, and Jessica Millar. Computable trees of Scott
rank ωCK
1
, and computable approximation. J. Symbolic Logic, 71(1):283–298,
2006.
[DKL+15]
Rodney G. Downey, Asher M. Kach, Steﬀen Lempp, Andrew E. M. Lewis-Pye,
Antonio Montalb´an, and Daniel D. Turetsky. The complexity of computable
categoricity. Adv. Math., 268:423–466, 2015.
[Dou14]
Michal Doucha. Scott rank of Polish metric spaces. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic,
165(12):1919–1929, 2014.
[Dou17]
Michal Doucha. Erratum to: “Scott rank of Polish metric spaces” [Ann. Pure
Appl. Logic 165 (12) (2014) 1919–1929] [ MR3256743]. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic,
168(7):1490, 2017.
[Fre08]
Cameron Eric Freer. Models with high Scott rank. ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor,
MI, 2008. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Harvard University.
31


[Gao07]
Su Gao. Complexity ranks of countable models. Notre Dame J. Formal Logic,
48(1):33–48, 2007.
[GD80]
S. S. Gonˇcarov and V. D. Dzgoev. Autostability of models. Algebra i Logika,
19(1):45–58, 132, 1980.
[Gon77a]
S. S. Gonˇcarov. The number of nonautoequivalent constructivizations. Algebra
i Logika, 16(3):257–282, 377, 1977.
[Gon77b]
S. S. Gonˇcarov. The number of nonautoequivalent constructivizations. Algebra
i Logika, 16(3):257–282, 377, 1977.
[Har68]
Joseph Harrison. Recursive pseudo-well-orderings. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.,
131:526–543, 1968.
[HKS03]
Denis R. Hirschfeldt, Bakhadyr Khoussainov, and Richard A. Shore. A com-
putably categorical structure whose expansion by a constant has inﬁnite com-
putable dimension. J. Symbolic Logic, 68(4):1199–1241, 2003.
[Ho17]
Meng-Che Ho. Describing groups. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 145(5):2223–2239,
2017.
[HT]
Matthew Harrison-Trainor. Describing ﬁnitely presented algebraic structures.
preprint.
[HT18]
Matthew Harrison-Trainor. Scott ranks of models of a theory. Adv. Math.,
330:109–147, 2018.
[HTH18]
Matthew Harrison-Trainor and Meng-Che Ho. On optimal Scott sentences of
ﬁnitely generated algebraic structures. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 146(10):4473–
4485, 2018.
[HTH21]
Matthew Harrison-Trainor and Meng-Che Ho.
Finitely generated groups
are universal among ﬁnitely generated structures.
Ann. Pure Appl. Logic,
172(1):102855, 2021.
[HTIK18]
Matthew Harrison-Trainor, Gregory Igusa, and Julia F. Knight.
Some new
computable structures of high rank.
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 146(7):3097–
3109, 2018.
[Kle55]
S. C. Kleene.
On the forms of the predicates in the theory of constructive
ordinals. II. Amer. J. Math., 77:405–428, 1955.
[KM10]
J. F. Knight and J. Millar. Computable structures of rank ωCK
1 . J. Math. Log.,
10(1-2):31–43, 2010.
[KM14]
J. F. Knight and C. McCoy. Index sets and Scott sentences. Arch. Math. Logic,
53(5-6):519–524, 2014.
32


[KMS16]
Julia Knight, Antonio Montalb´an, and Noah Schweber. Computable structures
in generic extensions. J. Symb. Log., 81(3):814–832, 2016.
[KS18]
Julia F. Knight and Vikram Saraph. Scott sentences for certain groups. Arch.
Math. Logic, 57(3-4):453–472, 2018.
[Lar17]
Paul B. Larson. Scott processes. In Beyond ﬁrst order model theory, pages
23–76. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2017.
[LE65]
E. G. K. Lopez-Escobar. An interpolation theorem for denumerably long for-
mulas. Fund. Math., 57:253–272, 1965.
[Mak81]
M. Makkai. An example concerning Scott heights. J. Symbolic Logic, 46(2):301–
318, 1981.
[Mar88]
David Marker. An analytic equivalence relation not arising from a Polish group
action. Fund. Math., 130(3):225–228, 1988.
[Mar90]
David Marker. Bounds on Scott rank for various nonelementary classes. Arch.
Math. Logic, 30(2):73–82, 1990.
[Mar02]
David Marker. Model theory, volume 217 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, New York, 2002. An introduction.
[Mar16]
David Marker. Lectures on inﬁnitary model theory, volume 46 of Lecture Notes
in Logic. Association for Symbolic Logic, Chicago, IL; Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2016.
[Mil78]
Douglas E. Miller. The invariant Π0α separation principle. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc., 242:185–204, 1978.
[Mil83]
Arnold W. Miller. On the Borel classiﬁcation of the isomorphism class of a
countable model. Notre Dame J. Formal Logic, 24(1):22–34, 1983.
[MN13]
Alexander G. Melnikov and Andr´e Nies. The classiﬁcation problem for com-
pact computable metric spaces. In The nature of computation, volume 7921 of
Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 320–328. Springer, Heidelberg, 2013.
[Mon]
Antonio Montalb´an.
Computable structure theory: Beyond the arithmetic.
draft.
[Mon13]
Antonio Montalb´an. A computability theoretic equivalent to Vaught’s conjec-
ture. Adv. Math., 235:56–73, 2013.
[Mon15]
Antonio Montalb´an.
A robuster Scott rank.
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc.,
143(12):5427–5436, 2015.
[Mon17]
Antonio Montalb´an. Eﬀectively existentially-atomic structures. pages 221–237,
2017.
33


[Mor70]
Michael Morley. The number of countable models. J. Symbolic Logic, 35:14–18,
1970.
[MS08]
J. Millar and G. E. Sacks. Atomic models higher up. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic,
155(3):225–241, 2008.
[MW12]
Charles McCoy and John Wallbaum. Describing free groups, Part II: Π0
4 hard-
ness and no Σ0
2 basis. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 364(11):5729–5734, 2012.
[Nad74]
Mark Nadel. Scott sentences and admissible sets. Ann. Math. Logic, 7:267–294,
1974.
[Nie07]
Andr´e Nies. Describing groups. Bull. Symbolic Logic, 13(3):305–339, 2007.
[Pao]
Gianluca Paolini. Computable Scott sentences for quasi-Hopﬁan ﬁnitely pre-
sented structures. preprint.
[Sac83]
Gerald E. Sacks.
On the number of countable models.
In Southeast Asian
conference on logic (Singapore, 1981), volume 111 of Stud. Logic Found. Math.,
pages 185–195. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1983.
[Sac90]
Gerald E. Sacks. Higher recursion theory. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1990.
[Sac07]
Gerald E. Sacks. Bounds on weak scattering. Notre Dame J. Formal Logic,
48(1):5–31, 2007.
[Sco65]
Dana Scott. Logic with denumerably long formulas and ﬁnite strings of quan-
tiﬁers. In Theory of Models (Proc. 1963 Internat. Sympos. Berkeley), pages
329–341. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[Sil80]
Jack H. Silver. Counting the number of equivalence classes of Borel and coan-
alytic equivalence relations. Ann. Math. Logic, 18(1):1–28, 1980.
[Tur]
Dan Turetsky. Coding in the automorphism group of a computably categorical
structure. preprint.
[Vau61]
R. L. Vaught. Denumerable models of complete theories. In Inﬁnitistic Methods
(Proc. Sympos. Foundations of Math., Warsaw, 1959), pages 303–321. Perga-
mon, Oxford; Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw, 1961.
[Wad83]
William Wilfred Wadge. Reducibility and determinateness on the Baire space.
ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 1983. Thesis (Ph.D.)–University of California,
Berkeley.
34
