EFFECTIVELY CLOSED SUBGROUPS OF THE INFINITE SYMMETRIC
GROUP
NOAM GREENBERG, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, ANDRE NIES, AND DANIEL TURETSKY
Abstract. We apply methods of computable structure theory [AK00, EG00] to study ef-
fectively closed subgroups of S∞. The main result of the paper says that there exists an
eﬀectively closed presentation of Z2 which is not the automorphism group of any computable
structure M. In contrast, we show that every eﬀectively closed discrete group is topologically
isomorphic to Aut(M) for some computable structure M. We also prove that there exists an
eﬀectively closed compact (thus, proﬁnite) subgroup of S∞that has no computable Polish
presentation. In contrast, every proﬁnite computable Polish group is topologically isomorphic
to an eﬀectively closed subgroup of S∞. We also look at oligomorphic subgroups of S∞; we
construct a Σ1
1 oligomorphic group in which the orbit equivalence relation is not uniformly
HYP. Our proofs rely on methods of computable analysis, techniques of computable structure
theory, elements of higher recursion theory, and the priority method.
The study of computable presentations of topological groups originated in computable ﬁeld
theory [MN79] and was mainly driven by Nerode’s interest in algorithmic aspects of Krull
theory. Working under the supervision of Nerode, La Roche [LR81] proved that the corre-
spondence between computable algebraic number ﬁeld extensions and proﬁnite groups is uni-
formly eﬀective, in the sense that will be clariﬁed later. Quite interestingly, the algorithmic
techniques developed in [LR81] allowed La Roche to prove a theorem on free proﬁnite groups
that was new even in the purely algebraic (non-computable) setting, see [Jar74] for the earlier
and a weaker purely algebraic result. Based on the work of La Roche, Smith [Smi81, Smi79]
initiated the study of algorithmic presentations of proﬁnite groups in their own right, i.e. not
in the context of eﬀective Galois theory.
Such investigations in computable topological groups have not been restricted to proﬁnite
groups (see., e.g., [GR93]), but the general theory of computable Polish groups is still in
its infancy. Recently there has been an increasing interest in computable aspects of Polish
and Banach spaces [PER89, BHW08, Mel13, McN15] and, consequently, in computable Polish
groups [MM, Mel]. Many aspects of computable Polish groups are related to computable struc-
ture theory [AK00, EG00] and computable Banach space theory [PER89]. Such connections
are often quite subtle. For example, it turns out that many classical results of computable
structure theory have simpler proofs in the more general setting of a computable Polish group
action, see [MM]. On the other hand, the study of Pontryagin Duals of computable Polish
abelian groups enjoys applications of non-trivial eﬀective algebraic results, see [Mel]. It seems
that eﬀective algebra and computable topological group theory are two adjacent pieces of a
bigger puzzle. This paper contributes to the general framework proposed in [Mel13] that is
focused on establishing further technical connections between computable structure theory
and computable analysis, see also [MN16, MN13, MM, GMKT, McN15, MS, Mel].
Recall that a countably inﬁnite and discrete algebraic structure (e.g., a countable ﬁeld of
characteristic 0) is computable if its domain is ω and its operations and relations are Turing
The ﬁrst author was partially supported by the Marsden Fund of New Zealand. The second author was
partially supported by the Marsden Fund of New Zealand and Massey University Research Fund.
1


2
NOAM GREENBERG, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, ANDRE NIES, AND DANIEL TURETSKY
computable. Our main goal is to investigate automorphism groups of computable algebraic
structures. For this purpose we introduce a new notion of an eﬀectively closed group. (Our
second main result will imply that the notion below is indeed new.)
Deﬁnition 0.1. We say that a subgroup G of S∞is eﬀectively closed (or Π0
1 for short) if there
is an eﬀectively closed subset P of ωω such that G = P ∩S∞. An eﬀectively closed presen-
tation, or a Π0
1-presentation, of a group is an eﬀectively closed subgroup of S∞topologically
isomorphic to the group.
Automorphism groups of computable algebraic structures are clearly eﬀectively closed. It is
well-known that every closed subgroup of S∞is equal to the automorphism group of some
countable algebraic structure upon ω, see [Gao09]. It is natural to ask:
Is every eﬀectively closed group equal to Aut(C) for some computable C?
We will see that the answer to this question is negative, which seems somewhat counterintu-
itive. The reader perhaps suspects that the isomorphism type of any eﬀectively closed sub-
group of S∞witnessing the negative answer should be, in some sense, non-trivial. Remarkably,
already the two-element cyclic discrete group Z2 has a “bad” eﬀectively closed presentation.
On the other hand, Z2 is (topologically) isomorphic to Aut(C) for some computable C.
Theorem 0.2.
(1) There exists an eﬀectively closed presentation of the two-element cyclic group Z2 such
that G ̸= Aut(C) for any computable structure C.
(2) Every eﬀectively closed discrete group is topologically isomorphic to Aut(C) for some
computable structure C.
The main diﬃculty in the proof of Theorem 0.2(1) is nesting strategies on top of each other
and not losing the property of being a subgroup of S∞. We leave open whether Theorem 0.2(2)
can be extended to non-compact eﬀectively closed groups.
One could also argue that Deﬁnition 0.1 is natural in its own right; eﬀectively closed sets play
a signiﬁcant role in recursion theory, for some recent applications see [BC08, Rei08, HK14]. It
could be the case that the notion is actually equivalent to one of the already existing notions
restricted to closed subgroups of S∞. We compare Deﬁnition 0.1 with the mentioned above
notions of a computable Polish group [MM, Mel] and a recursive proﬁnite group [LR81, Smi81].
(The formal deﬁnitions will be given in the preliminaries.) Every recursive proﬁnite group
is computable Polish, but there are computable Polish proﬁnite groups with no recursive
presentation [Mel]. Recall that the proﬁnite groups are exactly the compact subgroups of S∞,
up to topological isomorphism.
Theorem 0.3.
(1) There exists an eﬀectively closed compact (thus, proﬁnite) subgroup of S∞that has
no computable Polish presentation (therefore, no recursive presentation).
(2) Every proﬁnite computable Polish group is topologically isomorphic to an eﬀectively
closed subgroup of S∞.
In particular, part (1.) of Theorem 0.3 shows that Deﬁnition 0.1 gives a new notion, while
part (2.) establishes a connection between Deﬁnition 0.1 and computable Polish groups. In
the preliminaries we will use similar ideas to suggest an extension of Deﬁnition 0.1 to groups
that are not necessarily totally disconnected. We leave open whether Theorem 0.3(2) can be
extended to arbitrary closed subgroups of S∞.


EFFECTIVELY CLOSED SUBGROUPS OF THE INFINITE SYMMETRIC GROUP
3
To ﬁnish the paper we look at the class of oligomorphic groups. There are closed subgroups
G of S∞for which for every n there are only ﬁnitely many G-orbit equivalence classes of n-
tuples. Oligomorphic groups are the automorphism groups of ℵ0-categorical structures. These
structures are homogenous. Thus, if an eﬀectively closed subgroup G of S∞is oligomorphic,
and equals Aut(M) for some computable structure M, then ∼G will in fact be computable. We
approach the question “how complicated can ∼G be for an eﬀectively closed oligomorphoc G?”
If we could construct an eﬀectively closed oigomorphic group with ∼G not computable, we
would get another example for our main result Theorem 0.2(1). Oligomorphic groups lie at
the other extreme from proﬁnite groups, for which every orbit equivalence class is ﬁnite, and
our initial hope was that it might perhaps be easier to handle them. Our intuition was wrong,
but the eﬀective content of oligomorphic groups turned out to be interesting on its own right.
Note that even for Σ1
1 groups, ∼G is Σ1
1; if G is oligomorphic, then for each n, the restriction
of ∼G to n-tuples must be hyperarithmetic. Interetingly enough, this fact lacks uniformity in
the following sense.
Theorem 0.4. There is a Σ1
1, closed oligomorphic subgroup of S∞for which ∼G is not
hyperarithmetic.
It would be interesting to obtain more information about the eﬀective content of oligo-
morphic groups; in particular, we leave open whether a Π0
1 oligomorphic group can witness
Theorem 0.2(1).
The structure of this paper is as follows. The small preliminary Section 1 contains for-
mal deﬁnitions, a description of the natural computable Polish presentation of S∞, and an
equivalent deﬁnition of an eﬀectively closed subgroup of S∞in terms of this presentation. We
arrange proofs according to the used methods. The proof of Theorem 0.3 can be found in
Section 2. Section 3 contains the proof of Theorem 0.2(1), and the proofs of Theorem 0.2(2)
and Theorem 0.4 are in Section 4, respectively.
1. Preliminaries
Throughout this paper we work in the category of topological groups. We only consider
isomorphisms between groups that are both algebraic and topological, i.e., homeomorphisms;
so henceforth “isomorphic” means “topologically isomorphic”.
Deﬁnition 1.1. A computable Polish (metric) space is a triple (M, d, (αi)i∈ω), where (M, d)
is a Polish space, the sequence (αi)i∈ω is dense in M, and there exists a uniformly computable
procedure which on input i, j ∈ω and ϵ ∈Q+, outputs a rational r such that |d(αi, αj)−r| < ϵ.
The points from the dense computable sequence (αi)i∈ω are called special.
A ball with a
rational radius and centred in a special point is called basic. Clearly, ωω under the usual
ultrametric forms a computable Polish space.
The basic open balls are the usual clopen
neighbourhoods.
Suppose F : X →Y is a map between computable Polish spaces. The map F is computable
if there exists a uniform procedure which, on input a basic open B ⊂Y, lists a set of basic
open balls in X whose union is equal to F −1(B). Note that we do not require to list all balls
contained in F −1(B). This approach is equivalent to the deﬁnition from, e.g., [Mel13]. Observe
that the product of two (or more) computable Polish spaces is itself computable Polish. The
deﬁnition below generalises the old deﬁnition of a recursive proﬁnite group [LR81, Smi81] to
arbitrary Polish groups.


4
NOAM GREENBERG, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, ANDRE NIES, AND DANIEL TURETSKY
Deﬁnition 1.2 ([MM]). A computable Polish presentation of a [second-countable Hausdorﬀ]
topological group G is a computably and completely metrized homeomorphic copy of G upon
which the operations · and −1 are computable.
We now discuss the inﬁnite permutation group S∞⊂ωω. For two permutations σ and τ
of ω, let
D(σ, τ) = d(σ, τ) + d(σ−1, τ −1)
2
,
where d is the usual ultrametic on ωω.
The dense computable subset of S∞is given by
permutations of ω with ﬁnite support. Then (S∞, D) becomes a computable Polish group
which we call the natural Polish presentation of S∞for reasons that will be explained shortly.
Recall that a closed subset C of a computable Polish space is eﬀectively closed or Π0
1 if there
exists a (Turing) computable enumeration of basic open balls whose union is the complement of
C, and recall Deﬁnition 0.1 of an eﬀectively closed subgroup of S∞. It seems quite natural and
certainly useful to deﬁne a Π0
1-subgroup based on the natural computable Polish presentation
of S∞of ωω instead. Luckily these notions coincide.
Proposition 1.3. A group G ≦S∞is eﬀectively closed (according to Deﬁnition 0.1) if
and only if the domain of G is an eﬀectively closed subset of the natural computable Polish
presentation of S∞.
Proof. We prove a bit more. Suppose that U is a basic open subset of ωω. Can we eﬀectively
list basic open subsets of (S∞, D) whose union is equal to S∞∩U? Conversely, given a basic
open V in (S∞, D), can we list basic open sets whose union U has the property U ∩S∞= V ?
In other words, is the metric D (on S∞) eﬀectively compatible with the usual metric d (on
ωω)?
Claim 1.4. The metric D deﬁned above is eﬀectively compatible with the standard ultrametric
d on ωω.
Proof of Claim. Suppose that a sub-basic open subset U of ωω is speciﬁed by a ﬁnite partial
map σ. If σ is not injective, then V = ∅. Otherwise, let τ1, τ2, . . . be the eﬀective list of all
possible extensions of σ−1 to an injective map with domain a ﬁnite initial segment of ω. Then
the sequence of pairs (τ −1
i
, τi), i = 1, 2, . . . corrsponds to a sequence of respective basic open
balls in (S∞, D) whose union we set equal to V . Note that each element of U ∩S∞belongs to
one of these basic open sets, and thus to V . Conversely, each f ∈V has a ﬁnite approximation
that is consistent with the restriction imposed by U.
Now suppose (σ, σ−1) describes a basic open set V in (S∞, D), where σ is a permutation
of an initial segment of ω. Then the open set U can be taken equal to the collection of all
extensions of σ to an element of ωω. The correspondence is clearly eﬀective.
□
Let P be a closed subset of ωω. It follows that we can uniformly pass from the enumeration
of P in ωω to the enumeration of P ∩S∞in (S∞, D) and back.
□
The proposition above allows us to extend Deﬁnition 0.1 to groups that are not necessarily
embeddable into S∞, but we leave this new notion outside the scope of this article.
Deﬁnition 1.5 ([LR81, Smi81]). A recursive presentation of a proﬁnite group P is a uni-
formly computable inverse system of ﬁnite groups, with surjective maps, whose inverse limit
is isomorphic to P.
It is known that recursively presented proﬁnite groups are exactly the automorphism groups
of computable algebraic number ﬁelds over a computable subﬁeld; see [LR81]. As we mentioned
above, every recursive proﬁnite group is computable Polish, but there are computable Polish
proﬁnite groups with no recursive presentation [Mel].


EFFECTIVELY CLOSED SUBGROUPS OF THE INFINITE SYMMETRIC GROUP
5
2. Effectively closed vs. computable Polish
Proof of Theorem 0.3(1). We construct an eﬀectively closed gubgroup of S∞that has no com-
putable Polish presentation. We will be using the result below:
Fact 2.1 ([Mel], Cor. 1.8). Every computable Polish presentation of a proﬁnite group P can
be transformed into a 0′-computable inverse system F0 ←F1 ←F2 . . ., with surjective maps,
whose limit is isomorphic to P.
For a set S of prime numbers let
PS =
Y
p∈S
Zp,
where Zp is the cyclic group of order p. This group is proﬁnite, as it is the inverse limit of the
groups Q
p∈S∩n Zp for n < ω.
First we observe that if PS has a computable Polish presentation then S is Σ0
2. To see this,
given such a presentation of PS, by Fact 2.1, we produce a 0′-computable inverse system rep-
resenting the group. By [Mel, Thm.1.9] we can use this to uniformly produce a 0′-computable
presentation – in the sense of computable structure theory – of the discrete countable group
L
p∈S Zp, which is the Pontryagin dual of P (see the book [Pon66] for more on Pontryagin’s
duality theory). Using the 0′-computable presentation of L
p∈S Zp we can 0′-computably list
the prime orders of elements of the group, showing that S is Σ0
2.
So it suﬃces, given a Π0
2-complete set S of primes, to build a computable structure M such
that Aut(M) is isomorphic to PS. The structure M will be a graph consisting of inﬁnitely
many disjoint components Cp, one for each prime p. Every Cp will have a loop of length p,
xp
0 −xp
1 −. . . −xp
p−1 −xp
0
and every node in the loop will have a [ﬁnite or inﬁnite] chain
xp
i −cp
i,1 −cp
i,2 −. . .
attached to it. The length of the chain depends on our approximation for the Π0
2 predicate
for p. If p /∈S then this predicate ﬁres for p only ﬁnitely many times, say s; in this case, we
make the length of the ith chain equal to s + i. The result is a rigid component. If p ∈S
then we make each of the p many chains inﬁnite. In this case the automorphism group of the
component will be isomorphic to Zp; each automorphism is determined by the image of xp
0,
which could be any xp
i .
Because there is no interaction between the components, Aut(M) ∼= Q
p∈S Aut(Cp) ∼= PS.
This isomorphism is topological as well, because in both copies, the topology is the product
topology where the components Aut(Cp) and Zp are discrete. In other words, in both Aut(M)
and Cp, the sub-basic clopen sets are determined by stating ﬁnitely many values for the
automorphism.
□
Proof of Theorem 0.3(2). Let P be a computable Polish proﬁnite group. We need to produce
a Π0
1 presentation of P. By Fact 2.1, there is a 0′-recursive presentation of P. We will use a
fully relativised form of the fact below.
Fact 2.2 (LaRoche [LR81]). Every recursively presented proﬁnite group is isomorphic to
Gal(K/N), where K is a computably presented algebraic extension of Q, and N is a com-
putable subﬁeld of K.
In fact, N is a ﬁxed ﬁeld that corresponds to a natural recursive presentation of the free
proﬁnite group upon countably many generators, see [LR81]; we do not need this fact.


6
NOAM GREENBERG, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, ANDRE NIES, AND DANIEL TURETSKY
Fix a 0′-computable ﬁeld K and a 0′-computable subﬁeld N of K such that Aut(K/N) ∼= P.
Our ﬁrst step is to obtain a 0′-computable relational structure F (with computable underlying
set and in a computable language) such that Aut(F) ∼= Aut(K/N) (all isomorphisms are
topological); then we obtain a computable structure ˆF such that Aut( ˆF) ∼= Aut(F).
To deﬁne F, we start with K; by taking a 0′-computably isomorphic copy we may assume
that N is computable. We name each elements of N by singleton unary predicate and re-
place the ﬁeld operations by their graphs. This adjustment does not change the topological
isomorphism type of the automorphism group, so Aut(F) ∼= P.
The next step is a version of Marker’s existential extension which preserves the automor-
phism group.
Proposition 2.3. For any ∅′-computable relational structure A there is a computable struc-
ture B such that Aut(A) and Aut(B) are isomorphic.
Proof. We use the following piece of folklore in computable structure theory.
Fact 2.4 (Folklore, e.g., [GK02]). Let S be a Σ0
2 set. There exists a uniform procedure which,
for each x ∈ω, outputs a computable copy of ω if x ∈S, and outputs a computable copy of
ω2 otherwise.
We assume that the underlying set of A is computable, with a computable language. To
deﬁne B, ﬁx an n-ary relation of A. For every tuple ¯a ∈An we add a new inﬁnite set CP
¯a
of elements (these are pairwise disjoint). We link these “blow ups” of tuples by adding the
relation y ∈CP
¯x to B. Next, for every tuple ¯a ∈An we deﬁne a linear ordering LP
¯a of CP
¯a ,
which is isomorphic to ω if P(¯a) holds in A, and isomorphic to ω2 otherwise. We add the
relation y1, y2 ∈CP
¯x & y1 <LP
¯x y2 to the structre B. It follows from Fact 2.4 that B has a
computable copy.
To show that Aut(A) ∼= Aut(B), we notice that both ω and ω2 are rigid. Thinking of
the underlying set of A as a (computable, deﬁnable) subset of B, we observe that every
automorphism of B is determined by its restriction to A, and that every automorphism of A
can be extended to an automorphism of B. Let Φ: Aut(B) →Aut(A) be this restriction map,
Φ(τ) = τ ↾A; it is the required isomorphism. To see that it is topological, in the slightly less
immediate direction, we need to check that it is an open map. We take a sub-basic clopen
subset of Aut(B), which is the collection of automorphisms of B which extend some ﬁnite
map σ. The point is that σ may mention some elements of B \ A. Nonetheless, Φ[σ] is clopen
in Aut(A).
If q ∈CP
¯a is mapped to some p ∈CP
¯b , then to the image of [σ] we add the
restriction that ¯a is mapped to ¯b. Since ω and ω∗are rigid, mapping ¯a to ¯b is equivalent to
mapping q to p.
□
This completes the proof of Theorem 0.3(2).
□
3. Proof of Theorem 0.2
We must construct a Π0
1 presentation of Z2 which is not equal to Aut(M) for any computable
structure M (upon the domain of ω).
Informal idea. We explain the basic idea behind diagonalising against the eth partial com-
putable structure Me. We work in ωω. We start by enumerating a certain neighbourhood
into the complement of the presentation, and we say that we “forbid” the neighbourhood. For
some basic ¯a →¯b within this neighbourhood, we must have ¯a ̸→¯b in Me, as witnessed by some
ﬁrst-order atomic φ (unless Me is not total). Then, for some ¯c, it should be the case that φ(¯c)
or ¬φ(¯c), and thus necessarily either ¯a ̸→¯c or ¯c ̸→¯b. Until this happens the construction will


EFFECTIVELY CLOSED SUBGROUPS OF THE INFINITE SYMMETRIC GROUP
7
proceed in some ﬁxed basic neighbourhood, say ¯a →¯c. Once we see φ evaluated on ¯c (if ever)
and says that ¯c ̸→¯b, then we switch to ¯c →¯b and forbid ¯a →¯c. The key here is that we don’t
have to instantly forbid the neighbourhoods, but Me must (unless it is not total). We can put
sub-neighbourhoods of a given neighbourhood into our eﬀectively open set one-by-one. Thus,
we can delay our decision and do the opposite in the group presentation.
The trickier part is nesting the strategies on top of each other. For that, our construction
will proceed only within nested clopen subsets extending ¯x ↔¯y, where ¯x is an initial segment
of ω, ¯y is a permutation of ¯x, and the order of this permutation is 2. If we make sure ¯x¯a ̸→¯x¯b
in Me, we can still ﬁx a tuple ¯y¯c and repeat the basic diagonalisation idea, as above. It must
be the case that either ¯x¯a ̸→¯y¯c or ¯y¯c ̸→¯x¯b is witnessed by some ﬁrst-order φ, but both events
can be restricted to the neighbourhood ¯x ↔¯y. The key here is to choose numbers in ¯c to
be very large, so that both neighbourhoods ¯x¯a →¯y¯c or ¯y¯c →¯x¯b contain sub-neighbourhoods
isolated by ﬁnite permutations of order 2. Then the construction can proceed in one of the
two neighbourhoods. With some care we will end up with a copy of Z2. The rest is handled
by priority nonsense.
Proof. Fix a computable listing (Me)e∈ω of all (partial) computable structures upon the do-
main ω. We construct a Π0
1-subgroup P of the standard copy of S∞, and meet the require-
ments:
P ̸= Aut(Me),
for each e. We will also (globally) ensure that P ∼= Z2.
We will identify ﬁnite injective partial maps and the respective basic neighbourhoods in S∞
determined by their possible extensions.
Deﬁnition 3.1. We say that an injective ﬁnite map ¯x →¯y is nice if it is a ﬁnite permutation
of an initial segment of ω and has order 2 (i.e., is an involution). We write ¯x ↔¯y to emphasise
that the map and its respective basic neighbourhood are nice.
All our diagonalisation strategies will be working within (0, 1) ↔(1, 0). Some of the basic
neighbourhoods will be enumerated into the complement of P. If we enumerate a certain
neighbourhood into S∞\ P, we say that we forbid the neighbourhood.
There will be no
interaction between the process of approximating Idω and the procedure of approximating
the only non-identity element of P.
The basic strategy. We describe the basic diagonalisation strategy, for Me, in isolation. The
strategy will be working within a nice σe = ¯x ↔¯y.
(1) Forbid ¯xn →¯x(n + 1), where n = lth(¯x). (Note that ¯xn →¯x(n + 1) will be forbidden
by the construction anyway because of its proximity to Idω, so we could simply wait
until this happens.)
(2) Wait for Me to separate some ¯x¯a and ¯x¯b extending ¯xn and ¯x(n + 1) (and having
the same length) by a ﬁrst-order atomic formula φ. Until this happens, if ever, let
the construction proceed within the nice neighbourhood ¯xn ↔¯yn. One-by-one, start
forbidding all other sub-neighbourhoods σe = ¯x ↔¯y of the form ¯xn →¯yk, k ̸= n. (If
Me is total but never gives such a φ, then run a back-and-forth argument on extensions
of ¯xn and ¯x(n + 1) to build an automorphism of Me extending ¯xn →¯x(n + 1).)
(3) If such a φ is found, choose ¯c consisting of very large and fresh numbers (and of the
same length as ¯a and ¯b). Proceed as follows:
(a) Extend the ﬁnite partial maps ¯x¯a →¯y¯c and ¯y¯c →¯x¯b to [ﬁnite] permutations of
order 2, let N1 and N2 be the respective nice sub-neighbourhoods. Since ¯x ↔¯y
is nice, both N1 and N2 belong to ¯x ↔¯y. By the choice of ¯c, these permutations


8
NOAM GREENBERG, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, ANDRE NIES, AND DANIEL TURETSKY
have not been forbidden yet. Stop the process of forbidding sub-neighbourhoods
of ¯x ↔¯y initiated at substep (2).
(b) Forbid what is left of ¯xn ↔¯yn. (Note that weaker priority strategies have been
working in this neighbourhood.)
(c) Start forbidding extensions of N2, one-by-one, and let the construction [i.e., all
the weaker priority strategies] proceed within N1. Forbid all basic open neigh-
bourhoods that do not contain Idω and are disjoint form N1 and N2.
(4) Wait for Me to evaluate φ on ¯y¯c, thus witnessing either ¯x¯a ̸→¯y¯c or ¯y¯c ̸→¯x¯b in
Aut(Me). If this never happens, the construction will forever stay inside N1.
Case 1: ¯x¯a ̸→¯y¯c in Aut(Me), as witnessed by φ. In this case Aut(Me) ∩N1 = ∅. Proceed
as above to (eventually) completely forbid N2 and keep all weaker priority actions
restricted to N1. We will see that in this case the only non-zero element of P is
inside N1.
Case 2: ¯y¯c ̸→¯x¯b in Aut(Me), as witnessed by φ. In this case stop forbidding N2 and
forbid what is left of N1. Choose a nice τ within N2 and restrict the actions of
all weaker priority strategies to τ. Similarly to Case 1, the only non-zero element
of P will be contained in τ.
Priority and initialisation. We order the strategies according to the index of the partial
computable structure that they are guessing, with smaller indices corresponding to stronger
priority. Every time a basic strategy changes its mind about the neighbourhood in which
the construction [i.e., the weaker priority strategies]should proceed, we initialise all weaker
priority strategies. This is done by picking a new nice neighbourhood σi within the current
neighbourhood of the higher priority strategy in which it allows the construction to proceed.
We also make sure that the diameter of the nice neighbourhood σi of the ith strategy is at
most 2−i (equivalently, we could require that the domain of the ﬁnite nice map contains at
least i elements).
Construction. At the beginning of the construction, we will ﬁx a nice basic neighbourhood
of Id (say, (0, 1) ↔(0, 1)) and some other nice neighbourhood (say, (0, 1) ↔(1, 0)) disjoint
from it. From this point on, we keep forbidding all (not necessarily nice) sub-neighbourhoods
of (0, 1) ↔(0, 1) that do not contain Idω. We set σ0 = (0, 1) ↔(1, 0).
Veriﬁcation. We verify some of the key properties of the construction, stage-by-stage.
Claim 3.2. Suppose Me is total, and ¯xn ̸→¯x(n+1) Aut(Me) . Then at stage (2) we can ﬁnd
¯x¯a and ¯x¯b extending ¯xn and ¯x(n + 1), respectively, and a ﬁrst-order atomic formula φ that
separates ¯x¯a and ¯x¯b.
Proof of Claim. Suppose such ¯x¯a and ¯x¯b and an atomic φ do not exist.
This means that
¯xn →¯x(n + 1) can be extended to an automorphism of Me in a back-and-forth fashion,
contradicting ¯xn ̸→¯x(n + 1).
□
We follow the notation and the terminology used in the construction.
Claim 3.3. Suppose substage (3) is reached. Then there exists a tuple ¯c and nice neighbour-
hoods N1 and N2 with the desired properties.
Proof of Claim. Recall that only ﬁnitely many basic neighbourhoods can be forbidden at every
stage of the construction. In particular, only ﬁnitely many sub-neighbourhoods of σe = ¯x ↔¯y


EFFECTIVELY CLOSED SUBGROUPS OF THE INFINITE SYMMETRIC GROUP
9
of the form ¯xn →¯yk, k ̸= n, have been enumerated into the complement of the eﬀectively
closed set that we build. In particular, we can choose ¯c so that ¯x¯a →¯y¯c has not been forbidden
yet. Furthermore, choosing ¯c large enough we can ensure that both ¯x¯a →¯y¯c and ¯y¯c →¯x¯b can
be extended to ﬁnite permutations of order 2 which have not yet been forbidden. This is done
by simply setting σ(j) = i if σ(i) = j already, and by declaring σ(k) = k for all other k.
□
The importance of choosing ¯c very large in (3) is best illustrated by the simple example
below.
Example 3.4. In the notation as above, suppose ¯x¯a →¯x¯b is (0, 1, 2, 7, 11) →(0, 1, 3, 2, 5).
It extends ¯xn
→
¯y(n + 1) which is (0, 1, 2)
→
(0, 1, 3).
Fix A, B, C very large,
they could be equal to 100, 101, 102.
Consider (0, 1, 2, 7, 11) →(1, 0, 101, 102, 103) and
(1, 0, 101, 102, 103) →(0, 1, 3, 2, 5).
We could extend them to [ﬁnite] permutations, say
to (0, 1, 2, 7, 11, 101, 102, 103) →(1, 0, 101, 102, 103, 2, 7, 11) and (1, 0, 2, 3, 5, 101, 102, 103) →
(0, 1, 102, 101, 103, 3, 2, 5), respectively. Recall we were slowly forbidding all neighbourhoods
in ¯x ↔¯y except for extensions of ¯xn ↔¯yn, which is (0, 1, 2) →(1, 0, 2) in this particu-
lar case. But 101 is large enough so that (0, 1, 2, 7, 11) →(1, 0, 101, 102, 103) has not been
forbidden yet. The neighbourhood (1, 0, 2, 3, 5, 101, 102, 103) →(0, 1, 102, 101, 103, 3, 2, 5) has
not been forbidden since 102 is large enough. We could easily extend each of these ﬁnite
maps to permutations of ω ↾103 of order 2 by making all the rest i < 103 stable under
the permutation. This will give us nice extensions of (0, 1, 2, 7, 11) →(1, 0, 101, 102, 103) and
(1, 0, 101, 102, 103) →(0, 1, 3, 2, 5) which have not been forbidden yet in the construction.
(Note that 2 was accidentally mentioned in the domain of the second permutation, due to
the choice of ¯b and ¯a. If it was not the case, we’d have to choose a large fresh D and map
2 ↔D, just to make sure the extension is not forbidden.) Note that both neighbourhoods are
contained within the basic neighbourhood of (0, 1) ↔(1, 0).
Claim 3.5. Suppose the eth strategy is never initialised after stage s.
Regardless of the
outcome, there exists an s′ ≥s and a nice neighbourhood Ne such that all the weaker priority
strategies (j > e) perform their actions within Ne.
Proof of Claim. The strategy may never ﬁnd a φ and a pair of witnesses at substage (2), in
which case all weaker priority strategies will work within ¯xn ↔¯yn. Otherwise, depending
on the outcome, it may either stay within N1 forever, or it may eventually switch to N2 and
never change the neighbourhood again.
□
The basic module of the eth strategy makes sure that no element in the eventually stable
neighbourhood Ne can be in Aut(Me) if Me is total.
Note that, whenever a strategy is
initialised it can pick a nice neighbourhood within the part of S∞that has not been forbidden
yet by the higher priority strategies. A straightforward inductive argument shows that for
every e, the eth strategy eventually never changes its neighbourhood that it keeps unforbidden,
and therefore every strategy is eventually never initialised.
The eth strategy ensures that some nice τe determined by its stable Ne is the approximation
of P \ {Idω}. It follows from the construction that all elements of S∞in (0, 1) ↔(0, 1) that
do not extend τe will be eventually forbidden by the e’th strategy. Also, all neighbourhoods
outside (0, 1) ↔(0, 1) that do not contain Idω will be forbidden in the construction.
Note that the diameter of the nice eventually stable neighbourhood Ne is at most 2−e, and
Ne+1 ⊂Ne for every e. It follows that the intersection of all these eventually stable Ne is a
singleton whose only element is the limit of the ∆0
2 sequence (τe)e∈ω. The singleton describes
the only non-Id element Θ of the Π0
1 set P that we end up with. Note that τ 2
e = Idsupp(τe),
for each e. It follows that Θ2 = Idω. Thus, P ∼= Z2.
□


10
NOAM GREENBERG, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, ANDRE NIES, AND DANIEL TURETSKY
4. Discrete Π0
1-presented groups and oligomorphic groups
We know that Z2 has a complicated Π0
1 presentation, but it is also clear that Z2 has a
“nice” presentation equal to Aut(M) for some computable M. This elementary observation is
a special case of the more general result: Every discrete Π0
1-presented group P is isomorphic
to Aut(M) for some computable structure M (Theorem 0.2(2)).
To prove the theorem we analyse the complexity of the orbit equivalence relation. Let G be
a subgroup of S∞. For all n < ω, the group G acts on the collection ωn of n-tuples of natural
numbers; the resulting orbit equivalence relation ∼G is deﬁned on ω<ω by letting ¯a ∼G ¯b if
|¯a| = |¯b| and there is some σ ∈G such that σ(¯a) = ¯b. We prove the following:
Proposition 4.1. If G is a discrete, eﬀectively closed subgroup of S∞, then ∼G is hyperarith-
metic.
(This means that for each n, the orbit equivalence relation for n-tuples is hyperarithmetic,
uniformly in n.)
Proposition 4.2. If G is an eﬀectively closed subgroup of S∞and ∼G is hyperarithmetic,
then there is a computable structure M such that G ∼= Aut(M).
Theorem 0.2(2) then follows. Proposition 4.2 is itself the conjunction of two lemmas.
Lemma 4.3. Every closed subgroup G of S∞is equal to Aut(M) for some structure M
computable from ∼G.
Lemma 4.4. For every hyperarithmetic structure M there is a computable structure N such
that Aut(N) ∼= Aut(M).
Lemma 4.4 is a generalisation of Proposition 2.3. Say that M is ∆0
γ for some computable
ordinal γ. We use a generalisation of Fact 2.4 that allows us to code membership in a Σ0
α
class into an isomorphism type of one of two rigid linear orderings which satisfy the same
computable Πγ inﬁnitary formulas but are separated thereafter. For example, we can produce
a copy of ωγ+1 if a Σ0
γ fact holds, and a copy of ωγ+2 otherwise; for our purposes, the complexity
does not need to be tight. See [GK02, Prop.4.12]. The argument then is the same as that of
Proposition 2.3.
Lemma 4.3 is an observation that the standard construction of a structure M such that
G = Aut(M) does in fact give us a structure computable from ∼G, see [Gao09]. For any n
and for every ∼G-equivalence class of n-tuples we deﬁne an n-ary relation which deﬁnes that
class. Closure of G is used to show that Aut(M) ⊆G.
It remains to prove Proposition 4.1.
Proof of Proposition 4.1. Σ1
1 subsets of ωω have the perfect set property in a strongly eﬀective
way: if a Σ1
1 set A does not have a perfect subset then all elements of A are hyperarithmetic,
and so by Spector’s Σ1
1 bounding, they are all computable from some 0(γ) for some ﬁxed
computable ordinal γ. (See [Sac90], Thm. 6.2.III.)
By Proposition 1.3, G is a Π0
2 subset of ωω. If all elements of G are 0(γ)-computable, then
0(γ+2) computes a listing of the elements of G; it then follows that ∼G is 0(γ+3)-computable.
□
This proves Theorem 0.2(2).
Remark 4.5. Note that if G is an eﬀectively closed discrete group, then it has a hyperarithmetical presentation
in the sense of computable structure theory (upon the domain of ω). It is easy to see that this observation
gives a characterization of discrete eﬀectively closed groups in terms of hyperarithmetically presented groups;
we outline the proof of the less obvious implication.
Let G be a countable (discrete) group. Use Cayley’s theorem and map g ∈G to the permutation h 7→gh,
call it σg. The image is discrete: σg is isolated by the neighbourhood e 7→g. This way we obtain an H ≦S∞


EFFECTIVELY CLOSED SUBGROUPS OF THE INFINITE SYMMETRIC GROUP
11
(topologically) isomorphic to G which is furthermore arithmetical in the diagram of G, in particular ∼H is
HYP. Lemma 4.3 gives a HYP M such that H ∼= Aut(M), and Lemma 4.4 allows to build a computable N
such that G ∼= H ∼= Aut(M) ∼= Aut(N).
4.1. Proof of Theorem 0.4. Recall that a (closed) oligomorphic group is a (closed) subgroup
of S∞such that for every n there are only ﬁnitely many G-orbit equivalence classes of n-tuples.
We construct of Σ1
1, closed oligomorphic subgroup of S∞for which ∼G is not hyperarithmetic.
We work in the admissible structure Lωck
1 . The idea is to use a coﬁnal ω-sequence ⟨αn⟩
in ωck
1 which is approximated eﬀectively (in the sense of Lωck
1 -computability) with only ﬁnitely
many changes to each value.
We deﬁne the orbit equivalence relation ∼G rather than G.
We break up classes of n-tuples into two whenever we see a change in the value of αn; this
happens only ﬁnitely many times, so at the end we get only ﬁnitely many classes of n-tuples.
The entire equivalence relation is not hyperarithmetic, as we can recover the sequence ⟨αn⟩
from it. To ensure that the equivalence relation is indeed the orbit equivalence relation of a
closed group we need to ensure that it is invariant under permutations, taking subsequences,
and has the back-and-forth property. This can be done dynamically, but in fact it is easy to
give an explicit deﬁnition of the relation.
To the details.
For a non-decreasing sequence k = ⟨kn⟩of natural numbers deﬁne an
equivalence relation ∼k on ω<ω.
For ¯a,¯b ∈ω<ω of the same length n, if they are both
injective, then we let ¯a ∼k ¯b if for every m < n there are at least n −m many i < n such that
ai = bi mod 2km. We then extend this to non-injective tuples in the obvious way.
We ﬁrst observe:
• ∼k is an equivalence relation.
• If ¯a ∼k ¯b then for any subsequence ¯a′ of ¯a and ¯b′ of ¯b chosen in the same way, ¯a′ ∼k ¯b′.
• ∼k is invariant under permutations: for any n-tuples ¯a,¯b and permutation σ of n, if
¯a ∼k ¯b then ¯a ◦σ ∼k ¯b ◦σ.
• ∼k has the back and forth property: if ¯a ∼k ¯b then for all c < ω there is some d < ω
such that ¯ac ∼k ¯bd.
• For every n there are only ﬁnitely many ∼k-equivalence classes of n-tuples.
We then let Gk be the collection of all f ∈S∞such that for all ¯a and ¯b, if f(¯a) = ¯b then
¯a ∼k ¯b. It is a closed subgroup of S∞; the properties just listed ensure that ∼k is the orbit
equivalence relation of the action of Gk, and that this action is oligomorphic.
We now start to work eﬀectively. Since the Σ1 projectum of Lωck
1 is ω, there is a ∆2(Lωck
1 )
increasing sequence ⟨αn⟩n<ω which is coﬁnal in ωck
1 ; see [Sac90] for an excellent exposition of
higher recursion theory. In fact, ⟨αn⟩has a ﬁnite-change approximation (see [BGM17]): there
is a ∆1(Lωck
1 ) array (that is, a Lωck
1 -computable array) ⟨αn,s⟩n<ω,s<ωck
1 such that writing αn,ωck
1
for αn, we have:
• For all limit ordinals s ≤ωck
1 , for all n, αn,s = limt→s αn,t; and
• For every n < ω, there are only ﬁnitely many stages s < ωck
1 such that αn,s ̸= αn,s+1.
Given such a sequence we deﬁne, for each s ≤ωck
1 ,
kn,s =
X
m≤n
#{t < s : αm,t ̸= αm,t+1}.
this deﬁnes sequences ks for s ≤ωck
1 . Our ﬁnal equivalence relation is ∼k=∼kωck
1 . The fact
that we used powers of 2 means that as for t < s, for all n, kn,t ≤kn,s, the equivalence relation


12
NOAM GREENBERG, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, ANDRE NIES, AND DANIEL TURETSKY
∼kn,t reﬁnes the equivalence relation ∼kn,s. This shows that ∼k is Π1(Lωck
1 ), that is, it is Σ1
1.
It follows that Gk is Σ1
1 as well.
The ﬁnal relation ∼k=∼kωck
1
is not hyperarithmetic: we can see that ω∼k
1
> ωck
1 , as in an
eﬀective fashion over Lω
∼k
1 [∼k] we can recover ⟨αn⟩: for all n < ω and s < ωck
1 , if the number
of ∼ks-equivalence classes of n-tuples is the same as that of ∼k, then αn = αn,s.
References
[AK00]
C. Ash and J. Knight. Computable structures and the hyperarithmetical hierarchy, volume 144 of
Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam,
2000.
[BC08]
Paul Brodhead and Douglas Cenzer. Eﬀectively closed sets and enumerations. Arch. Math. Logic,
46(7-8):565–582, 2008.
[BGM17] Laurent Bienvenu, Noam Greenberg, and Benoit Monin. Continuous higher randomness. J. Math.
Log., 17(1):1750004, 53, 2017.
[BHW08] V. Brattka, P. Hertling, and K. Weihrauch. A tutorial on computable analysis. In New computational
paradigms, pages 425–491. Springer, New York, 2008.
[EG00]
Y. Ershov and S. Goncharov. Constructive models. Siberian School of Algebra and Logic. Consultants
Bureau, New York, 2000.
[Gao09]
Su Gao. Invariant descriptive set theory, volume 293 of Pure and Applied Mathematics (Boca Raton).
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2009.
[GK02]
S. Goncharov and J. Knight. Computable structure and antistructure theorems. Algebra Logika,
41(6):639–681, 757, 2002.
[GMKT]
Noam Greenberg, Alexander G. Melnikov, Julia F. Knight, and Daniel Turetsky. Uniform procedures
in uncountable structures. To appear.
[GR93]
Xiaolin Ge and J. Ian Richards. Computability in unitary representations of compact groups. In
Logical methods (Ithaca, NY, 1992), volume 12 of Progr. Comput. Sci. Appl. Logic, pages 386–421.
Birkh¨auser Boston, Boston, MA, 1993.
[HK14]
Kojiro Higuchi and Takayuki Kihara. On eﬀectively closed sets of eﬀective strong measure zero. Ann.
Pure Appl. Logic, 165(9):1445–1469, 2014.
[Jar74]
Moshe Jarden. Algebraic extensions of ﬁnite corank of Hilbertian ﬁelds. Israel J. Math., 18:279–307,
1974.
[LR81]
Peter La Roche. Eﬀective Galois theory. J. Symbolic Logic, 46(2):385–392, 1981.
[McN15]
Timothy H. McNicholl. A note on the computable categoricity of ℓp spaces. In Evolving computability,
volume 9136 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 268–275. Springer, Cham, 2015.
[Mel]
A. Melnikov. Computable topological groups and Pontryagin duality. To appear in Transactions of
The American Mathematical Society.
[Mel13]
Alexander G. Melnikov. Computably isometric spaces. J. Symbolic Logic, 78(4):1055–1085, 2013.
[MM]
Alexander G. Melnikov and Antonio Montalb´an. Computable polish group actions. To appear.
[MN79]
G. Metakides and A. Nerode. Eﬀective content of ﬁeld theory. Ann. Math. Logic, 17(3):289–320,
1979.
[MN13]
Alexander G. Melnikov and Andr´e Nies. The classiﬁcation problem for compact computable metric
spaces. In The nature of computation, volume 7921 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 320–328.
Springer, Heidelberg, 2013.
[MN16]
Alexander G. Melnikov and Keng Meng Ng. Computable structures and operations on the space of
continuous functions. Fund. Math., 233(2):101–141, 2016.
[MS]
Timothy H. McNicholl and D. M. Stull. The isometry degree of a computable copy of lp. To appear.
[PER89]
Marian B. Pour-El and J. Ian Richards. Computability in analysis and physics. Perspectives in Math-
ematical Logic. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1989.
[Pon66]
L. S. Pontryagin. Topological groups. Translated from the second Russian edition by Arlen Brown.
Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, Inc., New York-London-Paris, 1966.
[Rei08]
Jan Reimann. Eﬀectively closed sets of measures and randomness. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 156(1):170–
182, 2008.
[Sac90]
Gerald E. Sacks. Higher recursion theory. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 1990.
[Smi79]
Rick L. Smith. THE THEORY OF PROFINITE GROUPS WITH EFFECTIVE PRESENTATIONS.
ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 1979. Thesis (Ph.D.)–The Pennsylvania State University.


EFFECTIVELY CLOSED SUBGROUPS OF THE INFINITE SYMMETRIC GROUP
13
[Smi81]
Rick L. Smith. Eﬀective aspects of proﬁnite groups. J. Symbolic Logic, 46(4):851–863, 1981.
