PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
Abstract. We study punctual categoricity on a cone and intrinsically punc-
tual functions and obtain complete structural characterizations in terms of
model theoretic notions. As a corollary, we answer a question of Bazhenov,
Downey, Kalimullin, and Melnikov by showing that relational structures are
not punctually universal. We will also apply this characterisation to derive
an algebraic characterisation of relatively punctually categorical mono-unary
structures.
Keywords: algebraic structures, deﬁnability, primitive recursion
1. Introduction
Punctual structure theory studies complexity issues of mathematical structures
as we do in computable structure theory, but using primitive recursion as the main
notion of computability instead of Turing computability. There are many situations
in which primitive recursive functions are preferable over just partial recursive func-
tions, the most obvious advantage being that primitive recursive functions always
halt and the time they take to halt can be calculated in advance — they won’t keep
you waiting, they are punctual. We will use the word punctual to refer to notions
that involve primitive recursive functions.
There has been a lot of work on punctual structures in the last few years [Mel17,
KMN17, BDKM19, DGM+19, DMN, DHTK+] as it turned out to be a much deeper
and richer topic than expected. For instance, punctual structures have been used
to solve a long standing question of Khoussainov and Nerode [KN08] on automatic
structures; see [BHTK+]. We refer the reader to the survey article [DMN] for more
motivation and information on the latests developments.
We will restrict ourselves to ﬁnite languages. A countable structure is fully prim-
itive recursive if its domain is N and the operations and predicates of the structure
are primitive recursive. So far, the study of punctual structure theory has been
restricted to the properties of fully primitive recursive structures, or variations of
these notion. The purpose of this paper is to study notions that involve presenta-
tions of arbitrary complexity and functions that are primitive recursive relative to
them. We hope that the ideas and techniques that we develop in this paper to work
in this new setting will be useful in further work of relative or on-a-cone notions in
punctual structure theory.
We concentrate on two notions: intrinsically punctual functions and punctual
categoricity on a cone. The former is about functions in ωω that are punctually
computable from all presentations of a structure, and the latter is about isomor-
phism that are punctually computable from a structure. For both notions we ﬁnd
2010 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 03D45, 03C57. Secondary 03D75, 03D80.
The second author was partially supported by Marsden Fund of New Zealand.
1


2
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
interesting structural characterization that are quite diﬀerent from their Turing
computable structure theory counterparts.
Before introducing these two notions, let us mention a corollary of our work that
solves a problem posed in [BDKM19]:
Theorem 1.1. The class of all structures over a ﬁnite relational language is not
punctually universal.
When we say that a class of structures is punctually universal, we mean that
every structure can be coded by a structure in the class preserving its “punctual-
theoretic” properties. In the case of Turing computability, it is well known that
graphs are universal in the strongest sense possible: every structure is eﬀectively
bi-interpretable with a graph and the interpretations are uniform and depend only
on the language of the structure. We will prove the theorem above in Corollary 3.8
using results about intrinsically punctual functions.
1.1. Intrinsically punctual functions. We consider the information content of a
structure that can be decoded in a primitive recursive way. We say that a function
f ∈ωω is intrinsically punctual in a structure A if f is primitive recursive relative
to B for every copy B of A. In Theorem 3.2, we provide a complete structural
characterization of the intrinsically punctual functions on a structure. Then, in
Corollary 3.6, we show that for relational structures, the only functions that are
intrinsically punctual are the ones that are primitive recursive already. We use this
result about the limited computational power of relational structures to deduce
that they are not punctually universal.
1.2. Punctual categoricity. A fully primitive recursive structure A is said to
be punctually categorial if for every other fully primitive recursive copy B of A,
there is primitive recursive isomorphism between them.
Punctually categorical
structures were studied in [KMN17, DHTK+], but no structural characterization
was found. Most examples are extremely simple. Maybe the most algebraically
interesting example is the inﬁnite dimension vector space over Zp for prime p.
Nonetheless, with much eﬀort one can construct complex unnatural examples of
punctually categorical structures. For instance, much in the spirit of [DKL+15],
punctually categorically structures do not even have to be (Turing) ∆1
1-categorical
[DGM+19].
In computable structure theory, the way to get a nice purely-structural charac-
terization of a property is to consider it on a cone. The third author has done a
lot of work investigating properties in computable structure theory which hold on a
cone of Turing degrees, as they often seem to behave better and have better struc-
tural characterization than their non-on-a-cone counterparts; see, e.g., [Mon13].
The natural subrecursive analogy of this notion has not yet been studied. In the
present paper we use properties which are primitive recursive on a cone with respect
to punctual reduction ≤P R which will be deﬁned in the preliminaries.
We thus consider punctual categoricity on a cone: A fully primitive recursive
structure A is punctually categorical on a cone if there exists a function g ∈ωω
such that for every copy B of A, there is a isomorphism f between A and B such that
both f and f −1 are primitive recursive relative to g⊕B. We ﬁrst consider relational
structures, and we ﬁnd that only trivial structures are punctually categorical on a
cone.


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
3
Theorem 1.2. (see Theorem 4.2) Suppose A is punctual relational structure. Then
the following are equivalent:
(1) A is punctually categorical on a cone;
(2) A becomes automorphically trivial after ﬁxing ﬁnitely many constants.
What can be said about relatively punctually categorical structures which are
not relational? In Theorem 4.4 we will show that every structure that is punctually
categorical on a cone must be ℵ0-categorical. We then extend this to a full model-
theoretic characterization of structures punctually categorical on a cone.
Theorem 1.3. A structure A is punctually categorical on a cone if and only if
(1) A is ∃-atomic;
(2) A is uniformly locally ﬁnite;
(3) A is highly local.
We clarify the notions used in the theorem above. A structure is ∃-atomic if every
automorphism orbit is deﬁned by a ﬁrst-order existential formula; see [Mon17]. A
structure is uniformly locally ﬁnite if there exists a function f which, given the
size of a ﬁnite subset F of A, bounds the cardinality of the substructure ⟨F⟩.
Finally, the technical notion of high locality says that for any large enough ﬁnite
D ⊇F, ⟨D⟩will intersect all automorphism orbits over F; see Section 4 for details.
In particular, condition (3) implies that ∃-atomicity is witnessed by bounded ∃-
quantiﬁcation, but the bound is numerical rather than syntactical. Of course, it
follows that every relatively punctually categorical structure satisﬁes conditions
(1)-(3), but in the case of relative punctual categoricity we do not know whether
these conditions are suﬃcient. We leave this as an open question.
As an application of Theorems 1.3 and 4.4, in Theorem 4.10 we will give an
algebraic characterisation of relatively punctually categorical unary structures. It
essentially says that, up to a ﬁnite number of exceptional elements, each punc-
tually categorical unary structure must be composed of inﬁnitely many copies of
some ﬁxed ﬁnite unary structure so that all these copies are automorphic over the
exceptional elements. Already structures with two unary functions are (Turing)
computably universal but they are not not punctually universal [DGM+19]. The
only known proof of this fact relies on a rather involved analysis of (plain) cate-
goricity of punctual structures [DGM+19]. However, relative punctual categoricity
of unary structures has not been explored; it may eventually lead to a more elegant
proof of their punctual non-universality.
2. Preliminaries
Informally, a function is primitive recursive if it can be computed by a program
that does not use unbounded loops. More formally, one obtain the notion of a
primitive recursive function by forbidding unbounded minimisation operator from
the inductive deﬁnition of a general recursive function. We thus close the elementary
basic functions only under recursion schemata and composition; see [Rog87] for
more details. It is well-known that we can allow bounded minimisation too.
We will need several relativised versions of primitive recursion.
Deﬁnition 2.1. We say that a function f is punctually reducible to a function g,
written f ≤P R g, if f can be obtained using primitive recursion and composition
from the basic primitive recursive functions and g.


4
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
In the deﬁnition of f ≤P R g, the primitive recursive schema of g contains only
ﬁnitely many mentions of g. We could therefore view g as a parameter from ωω
and thus view f as a primitive recursive functional; that is, for some i, we will have
f = P g
i ,
where (Pi)ω is a general recursive uniform enumeration of all primitive recursive
schemata with a functional parameter. Primitive recursive functionals will be used
to formalise sub-recursive relativisation throughout the paper. Whenever we claim
that a procedure is punctual relative to an oracle, then the oracle is always a total
function, and we mean that the procedure can be expressed as a primitive recursive
schema with this function adjoined to the list of basic functions.
In [DMN], Downey, Melnikov and Ng have suggested another, perhaps more
natural, notion of a primitive recursive functional. In this alternate approach we
say that a primitive recursive functional is a Turing functional Ψ such that there is
a primitive recursive time function t with the property that
(∀g ∈ωω) (∀x) [Ψg(x) ↓in at most t(x) steps];
that is, it is a total functional in which the number of steps in which its computation
halts is uniformly primitively recursively bounded for all oracles.
Alas, these two deﬁnitions of a primitive recursive functional are not equivalent in
general. For example, the functional Φg(x) = g(g(0)) is represented by a primitive
recursive scheme (in g) but the use of Ψ will not be uniformly primitively recursively
bounded. Nonetheless, if we restrict the input space to a compact P ⊆ωω for which
there exists a primitive recursive branching function b with the property
(∀g ∈P) [g(i) ≤b(i)],
then these two deﬁnitions become equivalent, as shown in the lemma below. If
P ⊆ωω possesses such a primitive recursive b then we say that P is punctually
branching. Up to a primitive recursive bijective coding, a punctually branching P
can be identiﬁed with 2ω.
Lemma 2.2. Suppose P ⊆ωω is punctually branching. Then for a Turing func-
tional Ψ whose oracles range only over P, the following are equivalent:
(1) Ψ possesses a primitive recursive time function;
(2) Ψ can be expressed as a primitive recursive scheme in which the oracle
function is declared a basic elementary function.
Proof. (1) →(2). Simply replace every instance of the µ operator with an instance
minimisation operator bounded by t(x).
(2) →(1). The ﬁrst naive (an incorrect) idea would be to use a compactness argu-
ment of some kind exploiting totality of Ψ; however this would not work in general.
Informally, we shall exploit primitive recursive branching of P as follows. Working
from the base of the primitive recursive scheme, produce a primitive recursive list
of all possible primitive recursive schemata reﬂecting all possible computations for
all possible values of g. For example, if Ψg is s(g(s(0))) and P is 2ω then Ψg will
be replaced with {s(0), s(s(0))}, the ﬁrst instance corresponds to g(1) = 0 and the
second to g(1) = 1. Of course, more complex schemata will require a more complex
splitting, but the resulting ﬁnite list will be uniformly primitive recursive; we can
therefore run all these schemata in the list at once and calculate the estimate on
the number of steps required to calculate each of them.


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
5
Formally, the proof is by induction on the complexity of the primitive recursive
scheme for Ψ. We must calculate a primitive recursive bound t(x) on the number
of steps required for Φg(x) to halt.
For the base of induction consider the following cases: Φg = o, Φg = s, Φg = In
m,
and Φg = g. The ﬁrst three cases are evident since they do not refer to g, while in
the case when Φg = g take t = b, where b is the primitive recursive branching of P.
Take t(x) = P
i≤x b(i) to make t monotonically increasing in its input.
The inductive step splits into two diﬀerent cases depending on whether the last
iteration is composition or an instance of primitive recursion.
Suppose it is composition,
Ψg(¯x) = Φg(Θg
1(¯x), . . . , Θg
m(¯x)),
where Ψ, Θ1, . . . , Θm there are primitive recursive operators with primitive recur-
sive time bounds t0, t1, . . . , tm.
As usual, we identify a tuple ¯x = ⟨x1, . . . , xm⟩
with its primitive recursive code. The time functions t0, t1, . . . , tm can be assumed
monotonically increasing in their inputs.
Deﬁne a primitive recursive time bound for Ψ by the rule
t(¯x) = t0(⟨t1(¯x), . . . , tm(¯x)⟩) +
X
i
ti(¯x),
which can be rewritten into a primitive recursive schema using the standard tech-
niques.
Now suppose that Ψ is deﬁned using an instance of primitive recursion, more
speciﬁcally
Ψg(¯x, 0) = Θg(¯x);
Ψg(¯x, y + 1) = Φg(¯x, y, Ψg(¯x, y)),
where Φ and Θ are primitive recursive operators which have corresponding primitive
recursive time functions t0 and t1. Deﬁne t by the rule
t(¯x, 0) = t0(¯x);
t(¯x, y + 1) = t1(¯x, y, t(¯x, y)) + t(¯x, y);
assuming that t is monotonically increasing in its input this gives the desired upper
bound.
□
Lemma 2.2 ensures that the deﬁnition below is robust.
Deﬁnition 2.3. A Turing operator Ψ on 2ω is punctual if there is a primitive
recursive function t such that Ψξ(x) ↓in at most t(x) steps, for any ξ ∈2ω.
In the deﬁnition, 2ω can be replaced with a punctually branching P ⊆ωω. A
typical use of Lemma 2.2 is illustrated in the proof of the simple proposition below.
Proposition 2.4. Let A be a countably inﬁnite structure in a ﬁnite language.
Assume f ≤P R B for every structure B ∼= A such that the domain of B is ω. Then
f is punctually bounded from above. That is, there is a primitive recursive function
h(x) such that f(x) ≤h(x) for every x.
Proof. Note that the number of distinct terms of length n in the free algebra in the
language of A is naturally bounded; this is because the language is ﬁnite. Thus, we
can ﬁnd an isomorphic copy B of A upon the domain of ω, such that each operation
in B is bounded by a primitive recursive function. This allows us to restrict the


6
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
space of all possible oracles in the computation to a punctually bounded space.By
Lemma 2.2, f ≤P R B implies that all potential computations of f(i) from B will
have a common bound which is primitive recursive in i.
□
We also note that we can sub-recursively relativise Lemma 2.2, in the sense that
“primitive recursive” can be replaced with “primitive recursive in f” throughout,
where f is any total function. In particular, Lemma 2.2 handles the case of an
arbitrary total functional Ψ : 2ω →ω<ω, because each total functional is primitive
recursive relative to “itself”; i.e., relative to a function f which imitates its com-
putation on each input, under some natural coding of the domain and the range.
Note that f does not have to be computable. Therefore our approach covers the
deﬁnition from [Kie81, BEY98] in which “online” procedures were assumed to be
merely total and not even necessarily (Turing) computable.
3. Intrinsically punctual functions
We identify a countable structure upon the domain ω in a ﬁnite functional lan-
guage {f0, . . . , ft−1} with the the function
f0 ⊕· · · ⊕ft−1(i, ¯x) =







fi(¯x),
if i < t;
0,
if i ≥t or the size of ¯x does not coincide with
the arity of fi,
where ¯x is a ﬁnite tuple of integers. In particular, the structure is punctual if, and
only if, the function f0⊕· · ·⊕ft−1 is primitive recursive. If a language of a structure
contains also some predicates then each predicate is considered as a {0, 1}-valued
operation.
Deﬁnition 3.1. We say that a family {Φi}i∈ω of ﬁrst-order formulae is a punctual
family if there exists a primitive recursive function g such that g(i) is the G¨odel
number of Φi. We write {Φg} for a punctual family indexed by a function g. (We
allow g to have arity greater than one if necessary.)
Recall that a function f : ω →ω is intrinsically punctual in a structure A if f is
primitive recursive relative to B for every copy B of A.
Theorem 3.2. Let A be a countably inﬁnite structure over a ﬁnite language and
f : ω →ω a function. Then f is intrinsically punctual in A if and only if
(1) f is bounded by a primitive recursive function, and
(2) there exists a tuple ¯a from A and punctual family {Φg} of quantiﬁer-free
ﬁrst-order formulae such that
f(x) = y
⇐⇒
(A, ¯a) |= ∃¯z(&i<j(zi ̸= zj) & Φg(x,y)(¯a¯z))
⇐⇒
(A, ¯a) |= ∀¯z(&i<j(zi ̸= zj) →Φg(x,y)(¯a¯z)),
where in both cases ¯z stands for the free variables in Φg(x,y).
Remark 3.3. We feel that the second (universal) property of Φg requires some
explanation.
It says that if a portion of the structure is large enough, it must
contain a pattern described by the respective formula. The formula can of course
contain many disjunctions, each testing the property of interest on a subset of its
the free variables.
Another possibility is that the formula may contain no free
variables at all. See the examples below.


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
7
Example 3.4. For a set A ⊆ω let NA = (ω, 0, s, A), where s(x) = x + 1, and A is
viewed as a predicate, i.e., it is the characteristic function of itself. This gives the
simplest possible coding of A into the isomorphism type of a structure, and it is
clear that A can be punctually extracted from any copy of NA. Deﬁne A0 = ¬A,
A1 = A, and Ay = 0 if y > 1. Then
A(x) = y ⇐⇒Ay(sx(0)),
where the family {Ay(sx(0))} of quantiﬁer-free sentences is clearly a punctual fam-
ily.
Example 3.5. For a set A ⊆ω let MA = (ω, 0, ◦, A), where
x1 ◦x2 = min(x1 + 1, x2).
In contrast with the previous example, the structure is locally ﬁnite. But for x, y ∈
ω we can deﬁne the term
tx(u) = (. . . (0 ◦u) ◦. . . ) ◦u
|
{z
}
x times
and the quantiﬁer-free formula
Φx,y(¯z) = ∨u∈{z1,...,zx}[&i<x[ti(u) ̸= ti+1(u)] & Ay(tx(u))].
with variables ¯z = z1, . . . , zx. Then the condition (2) of the Theorem is satisﬁed for
A(x) = y.
Proof. The up direction is quite standard. We prove the down direction. (1) follows
from Proposition 2.4. We concentrate in proving (2).
We construct a suﬃciently generic B in which all operations have a primitive
recursive bound. Let P be the punctually branching space of all countable struc-
tures in the language of A; the branching function p can be computed from the free
algebra in the language of A. In P, every inﬁnite path through P is a structure
in the language of A upon the domain ω in which every operation is realised by a
primitively recursively bounded function (cf. the proof of Prop. 2.4).
As usual in such proofs, given σ (viewed as an initial segment of B) and ι : σ →A
a partial isomorphism with range ¯a, we search for an extension τ ⊇σ and an
extension ξ of ι such that f(x) ̸= P τ
e (x) ↓for some x, where Pe is the e-th primitive
recursive operator. If we succeed then we consider the next operator, etc. However,
if f is equal to P B
e and e is least such, then our search for τ must have failed for
that e; suppose we fail on σ. We claim that this e will allow us to produce a g
satisfying the thesis of the theorem.
Apply Lemma 2.2 to punctually compute the ﬁnite collection of all ﬁnite ex-
tensions τ of σ for which P τ
e (x) = y. Punctually calculate a bound N such that
length(τ) ≤N for all such extensions. Taking the disjunction of the atomic dia-
grams corresponding to all such τ and replacing indices of elements in dom(ι) with
the corresponding ¯a in A, we get the desired formula Φg(x,y) which satisﬁes
f(x) = y ⇐⇒(A, ¯a) |= ∃¯z(&i<j(zi ̸= zj) & Φg(x,y)(¯a¯z)).
Now, if there was an extension τ ′ in P of σ of length at most N that is compatible
with A for which P τ
e (x) ̸= y then we could diagonalise against Pe. Thus, P τ
e (x) = y
for any extension of σ of length at most N that is compatible with A. Therefore
f(x) = y ⇐⇒(A, ¯a) |= ∀¯z(&i<j(zi ̸= zj) & Φg(x,y)(¯a¯z)),


8
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
as desired.
□
Corollary 3.6. If A is relational structure and f ≤P R B for every B ∼= A upon
the domain ω, then f is primitive recursive.
Proof. By Proposition 2.4, the function f is bounded by a primitive recursive func-
tion. By (2) for every x, y ∈ω we can primitive recursively generate a quantiﬁer-free
formula Φg(x,y) with free variables ¯z = [z1, . . . , zk] such that
f(x) = y ⇐⇒(A, ¯a) |= ∀¯z(&i<j(zi ̸= zj) →Φg(x,y)),
for some ﬁxed tuple of parameters ¯a.
In this proof the parameters ¯a can be completely omitted by replacing the lan-
guage of A with a modiﬁed language which takes care of the parameters and is
punctually bi-interpretable with the original language; see the remark below for a
more detailed explanation.
Remark 3.7. Adding more relations which imitate the relations with parameters
from ¯a. For example, if P is a quaternary relation then we add new relations R like
R(x1, x2) ⇐⇒P(x1, a2, x2, a1) for each possible substitution of the parameters
¯a = a1, a2, . . . into P. We go through the ﬁnitely many relations and parame-
ters until we produce a ﬁnite language extending the original one. Note that we
can punctually rewrite P(¯a¯x) in terms of the new predicates, and thus we can
punctually and uniformly transform our formulae Φ into new formulae in the new
language. These new formulae will not mention the parameters but will still satisfy
the assumed property.
Furthermore, we can bi-interpret each relation in the language with a ﬁnite
number of (totally) irreﬂexive relations R(x1, . . . , xk); i.e., with relations such that
R(x1, . . . , xk) =⇒&i<j≤k[xi ̸= xj].
For example, a predicate P(x1, x2, x3) can be bi-interpreted with the following ﬁve
predicates
P ′(x1, x2, x3) ⇐⇒[x1 ̸= x2] & [x1 ̸= x3] & [x2 ̸= x3] & P(x1, x2, x3),
P ′′(x1, x2) ⇐⇒[x1 ̸= x2] & P(x1, x1, x2),
P ′′′(x1, x2) ⇐⇒[x1 ̸= x2] & P(x1, x2, x2),
P IV (x1, x2) ⇐⇒[x1 ̸= x2] & P(x1, x2, x1),
P V (x1) ⇐⇒P(x1, x1, x1)
by the rule
P(x1, x2, x3) ⇐⇒
P ′(x1, x2, x3) ∨
P ′′(x1, x3) & [x1 = x2] ∨
P ′′′(x1, x2) & [x2 = x3] ∨
P IV (x1, x2) & [x2 = x3] ∨
P V (x1) & [x1 = x2] & [x2 = x3].
Furthermore, we can make the arity of each irreﬂexive relation equal to the
maximal arity K which occurs in the language. For example, if K = 3 we can
replace a unary relation P(x) by the ternary irreﬂexive relation
P ′(x1, x2, x3) ⇐⇒[x1 ̸= x2] & [x1 ̸= x3] & [x2 ̸= x3] & P(x1).


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
9
We repeat this procedure until all predicates have the same arity and all are ir-
reﬂexive.
After all these transformations are done, the structure A can be viewed as a
K-multigraph coloured by ﬁnitely many colours, as follows. The domain of A is ω.
Although < on ω is not in the language of A, we intend to use the natural ordering
relation < on the ﬁxed copy A.
For an irreﬂexive relation P and a permutation π on the integers 1, 2, . . . , K, we
are adding one speciﬁc bit to the color of the K-edge {x1 < x2 < · · · < xK} if
and only if P(xπ(1), . . . , xπ(K)). So the colouring will consist of ﬁnite tuples of pairs
(P, π), where P range over the predicates and π over the ﬁnitely many permutations
of 1, 2, . . . , K. By Ramsey’s Theorem there is an inﬁnite monochromatic set X ⊆ω.
In this set, all K-edges have the same color. This means that on the inﬁnite set X
the truth of a predicate P(x1, . . . , xn) depends only on the natural ordering between
the elements x1, . . . , xn ∈X.
Therefore, by Ramsey’s Theorem the inﬁnite structure A in a ﬁnite relational
language contains an inﬁnite substructure B isomorphic to a punctual structure. (In
fact, the substructure can be chosen isomorphic to a quantiﬁer-free interpretation
in the ordering ω, so it has an automatic and thus decidable presentation.) Then
the graph of f will be primitive recursive, since
f(x) = y ⇐⇒B |= ∃¯z(&i<j(zi ̸= zj) & Φg(x,y))
and
f(x) = y ⇐⇒B |= ∀¯z(&i<j(zi ̸= zj) →Φg(x,y)).
Thus, the function f is primitive recursive.
□
Recall that we consider only structures in ﬁnite languages.
Corollary 3.8. Relational structures are not punctually universal.
Proof. It is suﬃcient to show that Corollary 3.6 fails for structures which are not
relational. Indeed, any punctual interpretation of an arbitrary structure X into a
relational structure A(X) would allow to punctually reconstruct a copy of X from
a copy of A(X). Thus, if a non-primitive recursive function could be punctually
coded into X, then it would also be coded into the relational A(X), contradicting
Corollary 3.6.
It is easy to punctually encode a non-recursive set X into a 1-generated structure
M, as follows.
Produce an ω-chain using a unary function s, and use a unary
predicate P to code the n-th element of the set into the n-th point along the chain.
Also, ﬁx the generator by a constant 0.
□
4. Punctual categoricity
Recall f ≤P R g if f can be obtained from g and the standard elementary func-
tions using composition, primitive recursion and bounded minimisation. Also, a
countable structure A having domain ω is viewed as a total function under some
ﬁxed G¨odel coding.
4.1. Punctual categoricity on a cone. The deﬁnition below is a relativisation
of the notion of punctually categorical structure suggested by Kalimullin, Melnikov
and Ng [KMN17].


10
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
Deﬁnition 4.1. A structure A is punctually categorical (p.c.) on a cone if there
exists a total function g such that for any structure B ∼= A, there exists an isomor-
phism f : A →B such that f ≤P R g ⊕B and f −1 ≤P R g ⊕B.
In the deﬁnition above, if g is primitive recursive (in which case it can be
suppressed) we get the natural notion of relative punctual categoricity [KMN17,
KMnN17].
Theorem 4.2. Suppose A is a punctual relational structure. Then the following
are equivalent:
(1) A is relatively punctually categorical;
(2) A is punctually categorical on a cone;
(3) A becomes automorphically trivial after ﬁxing ﬁnitely many constants.
Proof. The only implication which requires a proof is (2) →(3).
Proposition 4.3. Let A be a punctually categorical structure. Then there is a tuple
¯u in A such that, for every tuple ¯x, each inﬁnite substructure X ⊆A containing ¯u
and ¯x non-trivially intersects every automorphism orbit of (A, ¯u, ¯x).
We ﬁrst prove (2) →(3) assuming the proposition, and then we prove the propo-
sition. If a relational structure is not automorphically trivial then every tuple ¯u
can be extended to a tuple ¯x ⊇¯u such that, for some y, z ∈A, we have
(A, ¯x, y) ̸∼= (A, ¯x, z).
Without loss of generality we can choose y such that (A, ¯x, y) ̸∼= (A, ¯x, z) for inﬁn-
itely many z; taking the inﬁnite substructure (over ¯x) generated by all such z we
arrive at a contradiction with Proposition 4.3.
Proof of Proposition 4.3. Let A be a structure punctually categorical on the cone
above f. Aiming for a contradiction, assume that every tuple ¯u extends to a tuple
¯x ⊇¯u such that some substructure X ⊆A contains ¯x but does not contain elements
automorphic to some y ∈A over (A, ¯x). We need to show that A is not punctually
categorical on the cone above f. We will build a structure B ∼= A such that there
is no isomorphism g : A →B such that g ≤P R f ⊕B and g−1 ≤P R f ⊕B.
We say that a pair of functions (g, h) is an isomorphism and its inverse, an ii-pair
for short, if g isomorphically maps A onto B and h = g−1. We need to meet the
requirements:
RΦ,Ψ : (Φf,B, Ψf,B) is not an ii-pair,
where (Φ, Ψ) runs over all pairs of primitive recursive operators.
We ﬁx some
eﬀective enumeration of all such operators, and assign higher priority to the re-
quirements whose pairs appear earlier in this enumeration.
At a stage we will have deﬁned a ﬁnite segment F of the structure B which is
mapped to a ﬁnite tuple ¯u in A; our plan is to extend this map to an isomorphism
from B onto A. Let RΦ,Ψ be the highest priority requirement which has not yet
been met. As noted above we have an extension ¯x ⊇¯u and an element y ∈A such
that (A, ¯x, y) ̸∼= (A, ¯x, z) for any z ∈X, where X is an inﬁnite substructure of A
containing ¯x and corresponding to y.
Let C be a structure with domain ω which extends F and which is isomorphic
to X. Let ¯xC be the tuple which corresponds to ¯x under this isomorphism.
We use the sub-recursively relativised version of Lemma 2.2 throughout the rest
of the proof and without explicit reference. Ψ is total, thus there will be a tuple


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
11
¯x′ = x′
1 . . . x′
n in A such that x′
i = Ψf,C(xC
i ) and ¯xC = xC
1 . . . xC
n. We split our
further arguments into two substeps below.
(1) If (A, ¯x) ̸∼= (A, ¯x′) then do nothing.
(2) Otherwise, if (A, ¯x) ∼= (A, ¯x′), then there must exist a y′ such that (A, ¯x, y) ∼=
(A, ¯x′, y′). Let zC = Φf,C(y′) which is well-deﬁned since Φ is total.
Let G be the ﬁnite portion of C extending ¯xC and, if applicable, ¯xCzC, which was
used in the computations x′
i = Ψf,C(xC
i ) and zC = Ψf,C(y′) above. Let AC be the
extension of G isomorphic to A so that (AC, ¯xC) ∼= (A, ¯x).
Then we have either (A, ¯x) ∼= (AC, ¯xC) ̸∼= (A, ¯x′) for x′
i = Ψf,AC(xC
i ), or
(AC, ¯xC, zC) ̸∼= (A, ¯x′, y′) ∼= (A, ¯x, y),
where zC = Φf,AC(y′). In either case, the pair (Φf,AC, Ψf,AC) cannot be an ii-pair
for B = AC. Therefore we can ﬁnd a ﬁnite portion F′ ⊇G ⊇F embeddable into
A which respects our mapping of F to A such that (Φf,F′, Ψf,F′) gives a formal
isomorphism disagreement.
To make sure that our isomorphism from B to A does not miss any elements of
A by extending F′ by one extra element whose image is the least element of the
domain ω of A which is currently not in the range of our partial isomorphism from
F to A. Now we can proceed with F′ in place of F to satisfy the next requirement.
At the end of the construction B will be the union of all these ﬁnite segments.
It is clear that all the requirements are met.
□
Note that in the proof above we used only totality of our operators, so the use
of Lemma 2.2 in the proof was an overkill.
□
If we knew any non-trivial examples of functional structures punctually categor-
ical on a cone (e.g., encoding a non-computable set) then this would give another,
perhaps quite elegant, proof of punctual non-universality of relational structures.
Alas, as we shall see in the next section, coding into such structures seems to be a
rather challenging task.
4.2. Characterising punctual categoricity on a cone. We say that two ele-
ments x, y ∈A have the same automorphism type over a tuple ¯a in A if there is an
automorphism of A which ﬁxes ¯a and takes x to y. The theorem below says that
every punctually categorical on a cone structure must be ℵ0-categorical.
Theorem 4.4. If A is punctually categorical on a cone then for every tuple ¯a
from A, the enriched structure (A, ¯a) has only ﬁnitely many distinct automorphism
orbits.
Proof. Suppose that A is punctually categorical on the cone above f.
Assume
that for some ﬁxed tuple ¯a = (a0, . . . , ap) from A, there exist inﬁnitely many
automorphism types in (A, ¯a).
To arrive at a contradiction it suﬃces to build a copy B ∼= A upon the domain
of ω such that, for every primitive recursive operator Φ, the following requirement
is met:
RΦ : Φf,B is not an isomorphism from B onto A.
We will meet the requirements one after another at stages s > 0.
At stage 0, we begin the construction of B with a ﬁnite partial structure having
domain {0, . . . , p} associated naturally with ¯a via i 7→ai.


12
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
At a later stage we will work with some RΦ, which will be the highest priority
requirement which need to be met. At the end of the previous stage we will have
constructed a ﬁnite partial substructure F of B upon {0, . . . , q} which is associated
with a ﬁnite tuple ¯u = (u0, . . . , uq) in A via a partial isomorphism ι : i 7→ui. Since
the tuple ¯u contains the tuple ¯a there are inﬁnitely many distinct automorphism
orbits over ¯u; indeed, if two points are automorphic over ¯u then they are also
automorphic over ¯a.
To meet RΦ, deﬁne a sequence of ﬁnite partial structures as follows. Set F0 = F,
and let Fn+1 be any ﬁnite partial structure such that:
(1) q + 1 ∈Fn+1;
(2) the domain of Fn+1 is an initial segment of ω;
(3) Fn is a proper partial substructure of Fn+1;
(4) the result of the application of any function from the language of A to
elements in Fn lies in Fn+1;
(5) the partial isomorphism ι can be extended to a partial isomorphism κ :
Fn+1 →A with domain Fn+1;
(6) there is no proper partial substructure G ⊂Fn+1 satisfying (1)–(5);
(7) the possible values of κ(q + 1) for all possible κ from (5) consistent with
(1)-(4) range over inﬁnitely many distinct automorphism types over ¯u.
Let n be the least such that
Φf,Fn(0) = v0, . . . , Φf,Fn(q) = vq, and Φf,Fn(q + 1) = w,
for some v1, . . . , vq, w ∈A; such an n exists since the functional is total.
To meet RΦ, extend the mapping ι : i 7→ui+1 using one of the possible deﬁnitions
of κ(q + 1) from (5) such that
(A, u0, . . . , uq, κ(q + 1)) ̸∼= (A, v0, . . . , vq, w),
noting that such a w exists because of condition (7). Set F = Fn and go to the
next stage.
At the end we will construct B ∼= A, and our actions at the stage at which we
considered RΦ will ensure
(B, 0, . . . , q −1, q) ̸∼= (A, Φf,B(0), . . . , Φf,B(q −1), Φf,B(q)),
and thus RΦ will be met.
□
Recall that a structure A is locally ﬁnite if for every ﬁnite subset F ⊆A the
substructure ⟨F⟩generated by F is ﬁnite.
Deﬁnition 4.5. A structure A is uniformly locally ﬁnite if there is a function h
such that
card ⟨F⟩≤h(card F)
for any ﬁnite F ⊆A.
It is well-known that the algebraic closure operator is uniformly locally ﬁnite for
each ℵ0-categorical M. Since every a ∈⟨F⟩is deﬁnable over F, we obtain:
Corollary 4.6. Suppose A is punctually categorical on a cone. Then A is uniformly
locally ﬁnite.


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
13
Corollary 4.7. Let A be a punctually categorical structure. Then there is a ﬁnite
tuple ¯u in A such that for every ﬁnite tuple ¯x in A there is an integer m¯x such
that, for every m¯x-tuple of pairwise distinct elements
¯z = z1, . . . , zm¯x /∈⟨¯u, ¯x⟩
the substructure ⟨¯u, ¯x, ¯z⟩intersects all automorphism orbits over ¯u¯x.
Proof. Suppose not. Then for every ¯u there is an ¯x such that for every m some
substructure ⟨¯u, ¯x, z1, . . . , zm⟩omits some automorphism orbit over ¯u¯x. Since there
are only ﬁnitely many automorphism orbits over ¯u¯x, we can assume that for all m
the structure ⟨¯u, ¯x, z1, . . . , zm⟩omits one ﬁxed orbit. Consider the inﬁnite collection
of ﬁnite substructures
{⟨¯u, ¯x, z1, . . . , zm⟩: m ∈ω}.
This collection forms an inﬁnite ﬁnitely branching tree under the embeddability
relation. By K¨onig’s Lemma there is an inﬁnite substructure X which contains ¯u
and ¯x, completely omits the ﬁxed automorphism orbit over ¯u¯x. This contradicts
Proposition 4.3.
□
Deﬁnition 4.8. We say that a structure A is highly local if it satisﬁes the condition
from Corollary 4.7.
A natural example of a highly local structure is a vector space over a ﬁnite ﬁeld.
Recall that a structure A is ∃-atomic if there is a tuple ¯u such that for every tuple
¯x there is an existential formula Φ¯x such that
(A, ¯u) |= Φ¯x(¯x′) ⇐⇒(A, ¯u, ¯x′) ∼= (A, ¯u, ¯x)
for every tuple ¯x′ from A.
Theorem 4.9. A structure A is punctually categorical on a cone if and only if
(1) A is uniformly locally ﬁnite;
(2) A is ∃-atomic;
(3) A is highly local.
Proof. First, suppose that A is punctually categorical on a cone. Then (1) follows
from Corollary 4.6, (3) follows from Corollary 4.7. Also, A is computably categorial
on a cone, thus (2) follows from [Mon17].
Now suppose A satisﬁes (1)–(3). Without loss of generality, we can ﬁx a ﬁnite
tuple ¯u which works for both (2) and (3).
Fix a total function f which naturally codes1:
• the uniform bound h from (1) (see Deﬁnition 4.5);
• the atomic diagram of some ﬁxed copy A on the domain ω;
• the correspondence ¯x 7→Φ¯x from (2) for the ﬁxed copy A;
• the correspondence ¯x 7→m¯x from (3) for the ﬁxed copy A.
Suppose B ∼= A. We will use a back-and-forth argument to build an isomorphism
g : A →B such that g ≤P R f ⊕B and g−1 ≤P R f ⊕B. We begin with mapping ¯u
to ¯u′ in B.
Suppose we have already constructed g : ¯x →¯x′. We ﬁrst explain how to deﬁne
g(y) for the next element y ∈A.
1That is, for each query we can punctually calculate a number x such that f(x) will give us
the desired answer, under some primitive recursive coding.


14
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
We need to punctually ﬁnd a y′ ∈B such that (B, ¯u) |= Φ¯xy(¯x′y′) for the exis-
tential formula Φy = ∃¯tΨ(¯t, ¯x, y), where Ψ is quantiﬁer-free with parameters ¯u. It
is suﬃcient to take any m¯x-tuple of distinct elements
¯z′ = z′
1, . . . , z′
m¯x /∈⟨¯u′, ¯x′⟩
in B to ﬁnd representatives all possible automorphism types over ¯x, including the
automorphism type of y′. The size of ⟨¯u′, ¯x′⟩can be punctually calculated using f
using the uniform bound on the size of ⟨¯u′, ¯x′⟩. Therefore, primitively recursively
in f ⊕B, we can generate ⟨¯u′, ¯x′⟩and then pick a m¯x-tuple ¯z′ of distinct elements
outside of ⟨¯u′, ¯x′⟩. By our assumption, one of these elements can be set equal to
y′ = g(y); however, to decide which one we can choose we must also evaluate Φy
on all these potential images.
To choose a correct y′ we restrict our search for t′
0, where ¯t′ = t′
0 . . . t′
k, to the
substructure
D0 = ⟨¯u′, ¯x′, y′, s′
1, . . . , s′
m⟩,
where s′
1, . . . , s′
m /∈⟨¯u′, ¯x′, y′⟩are arbitrary elements and
m = max{m¯xy : y ∈⟨¯u, ¯x, ¯z⟩},
for any m¯x-tuple ¯z not in A \ ⟨¯u, ¯x⟩. Note that this computation is punctual in f.
Similarly, we can search for each witness for ∃¯t but restricting the search to some
D1 ⊇D1 which can be calculated punctually in f, etc. Working punctually in f,
we will end up with a ﬁnite Dk such that ¯t can be chosen from Dk. Once we see
such a ¯t for some y′ among ¯z′. Once this is done we deﬁne g(y) = y′.
To extend g : ¯x →¯x′ to a new element y′ ∈B, take any N¯x-tuple ¯z of distinct
elements in A \ ⟨¯u, ¯x⟩and consider the ﬁnite set of existential formulae
{Φ¯xy : y ∈⟨¯u, ¯x, ¯z⟩}.
For one of these formulae we should have (B, ¯u′) |= Φ¯xy(¯x′y′). We can test the truth
of each of these formulae using the same method as we already explained above,
and punctually deﬁne g−1(y′) = y for an element y such that (B, ¯u′) |= Φ¯xy(¯x′y′).
It remains to observe that g is an onto isomorphism and both g and g−1 are
punctual in B ⊕f, as desired.
□
As an application of our machinery we derive a characterisation of relatively
punctually categorical unary structures.
Theorem 4.10. Suppose A is a countably inﬁnite algebraic structure in a ﬁnite
language consisting of unary functional symbols and predicates. Then the following
are equivalent:
(1) A is relatively punctually categorical.
(2) A is punctually categorical on a cone.
(3) There are ﬁnite substructures E, D ⊇E, and (Fi)i∈ω of A such that:
(i) A = D ∪S
i∈ω Fi;
(ii) for every i ̸= j, Fi ∩Fj = E and Fi ∩D = E;
(iii) every x ∈Fi \ D generates Fi;
(iv) for every i ̸= j, Fi is automorphic to Fj over D2.
2This means that D must be held ﬁxed.


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
15
Proof. The only implications that need to be veriﬁed are (2) →(3) and (3) →(1).
We ﬁrst check (2) →(3). We claim that almost all x ∈A will have isomorphic
(ﬁnite) spans. Suppose F is the smallest cardinality substructure among all the
one-generated substructures of A which appears inﬁnitely often. Let
E = {y ∈F : card ⟨y⟩< card F};
then by the choice of F almost all substructures of A isomorphic to F must intersect
by E. Let B be the union of all these 1-generated substructures intersecting by E.
We claim that A \ B must be ﬁnite. Suppose not. Then there will be some
isomorphism type of a 1-generated substructure which appears in A inﬁnitely often
but does not appear in B at all; call this isomorphism type exceptional. But then we
could build a C ∼= A and diagonalise against a pair of functionals Φ, Ψ, as follows.
At a stage we will have copied only ﬁnitely many exceptional substructures into C,
say m. To diagonalise against the next ii-pair (Φ, Ψ), copy only B into C and wait
for the pair of functionals to map (m+1) distinct exceptional substructures into C.
Then copy a bit more of A\B into C, including one more exceptional substructure,
and proceed to the next requirement.
We conclude that A is equal to the union of a ﬁnite substructure D and a family
F of isomorphic ﬁnite 1-generated structures such that all structures in F intersect
by some E ⊆D (which of course could be empty); thus, we have (i). It follows from
the deﬁnition of E that, for each F ∈F, every x ∈F \ E generates the whole F.
This gives (iii). Since D intersects only ﬁnitely many members of F by an element
not in E, we can enlarge D if necessary to ensure D ∩F = E for every F ∈F; this
is (ii).
We must check (iv). By Theorem 4.4, there are at most ﬁnitely many auto-
morphism types over D. We claim that almost all Fi lie in the same orbit over
E.
Suppose there are (at least) two inﬁnite orbits over E realised by the Fi. In
other words, there are two diﬀerent ways to extend E to Fi which are realised in A
inﬁnitely often; they will of course agree up to an automorphism of E, but this is not
good enough because we want E to be held ﬁxed. Note that E is an automorphism-
invariant substructure of A because its deﬁnition refers only to internal invariant
properties of A. Split (Fi)i∈ω into two sub-sequences, (F ′
i)i∈ω and (F ′′
i )i∈ω, one
corresponding to one way of extending E to F and the rest to all other ways.
Build a copy C of A. At a stage we will have copied only a ﬁnite part A into C,
including E. To diagonalise against a potential isomorphism ΦC : A →C, wait for
ΦC to map E in A to its natural image E′ in C. While we wait we keep copying
A into C. If Φ(E) ̸= E′ then we have diagonalised. Otherwise, as soon as we see
Φ = E′, start copying only (F ′
i)i∈ω into C and wait for Φ to prove that it is not an
isomorphism. If Φ is insists that it could be an isomorphism then, from some large
enough j, both Φ(F ′
j) and Φ(F ′′
j ) must start hitting the natural images ( ˆFi)i∈ω of
(F ′
i)i∈ω in C. But Φ(E) ⊆Φ(F ′
j) and Φ(E) ⊆Φ(F ′′
j ) must correspond to diﬀerent
orbits, while Φ(E) ⊆ˆFi will all realise some ﬁxed orbit (which is not necessarily the
same as the orbit of F ′
i over E). Once we have diagonalised against Φ we resume
copying all of A into C for a few more stages before attacking the next pair.
Thus, almost all Fi lie in the same orbit over E. Enlarge D to contain the ﬁnitely
many exceptional Fi. Noting that D and the Fi intersect only by E, we see that
condition (iv) holds too.


16
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
To prove (3) →(1) run a straightforward back-and-forth procedure which non-
uniformly maps the exceptional set D at the ﬁrst step. Observe that every search
through A and some other B ∼= A will be naturally bounded by the size of F.
□
5. An application of categoricity to universality
The following rather speciﬁc notion will be suﬃcient for our purposes; it is a rela-
tivisation of the natural enough notion of “bottom punctual categoricity” [KMnN17].
Deﬁnition 5.1. A structure A is bottom punctually categorical (b.p.c.) on a cone
if there exists a copy C ∼= A and a total function f such that for any structure
B ∼= A, there exists an isomorphism g : C →B such that g ≤P R f ⊕B.
In the case when g ≤P R f ⊕B is witnessed by a single primitive recursive oper-
ator,
g = Ψf⊕B,
then we say that A is uniformly b.p.c. (u.b.p.c.) on a cone.
Any ﬁnitely generated structure becomes uniformly bottom categorical (on a
cone) after naming a ﬁnite tuple which generates it.
It is easy to see that the
structures from Examples 3.4 and 3.5 are u.b.c. on a cone.
The technical no-
tion of u.b.c. on a cone leads to a diﬀerent (and a bit simpler) proof of punctual
non-universality of relational structures. The non-universality will be derived as a
corollary of the following technical result.
Theorem 5.2. Suppose A is a relational structure. Then A is uniformly bottom
punctually categorical on a cone if, and only if, A is automorphically trivial.
Proof. Suppose A is non-trivial, we show that it cannot be u.b.c. on a cone above f.
Fix n ∈ω least such that (x1, . . . , xn, y) ̸∼=Aut (x1, . . . xn, z), for some x1, . . . xn, y, z ∈
A. Note that the minimality of n implies that all n-tuples of A are automorphic.
The key is to use elements from diﬀerent orbits over ¯x for diagonalization pur-
poses. The oracle will be assumed to (punctually) “know” these orbits. Either there
is one inﬁnite orbit and ﬁnitely many ﬁnite orbits, or there are two automorphism
invariant (over ¯x) inﬁnite sets consisting of distinct orbits (over ¯x). Depending on
which of the two cases holds, we use elements from distinct orbits to diagonalise
against Φ.
To diagonalise against a potential f-punctual operator Φ, build another copy B
of A with the help of an oracle. The oracle will help us to deal with the special
invariant sets corresponding to ¯x. The description of the oracle will be incorporated
into the description of the structures, but we could ﬁrst describe the oracle and
then give a formal description of the strategies, so there is no danger of circularity
here. We give details below.
Case 1. There exist inﬁnite sets Y¯x and Z¯x, both automorphism-invariant over ¯x,
such that any y ∈Y¯x and z ∈Z¯x are not pairwise automorphic over ¯x = (x1, . . . xn).
These sets will be composed of automorphism orbits over ¯x. Recall that each such
¯x′ is automorphic to ¯x; thus, Y ¯
x′ and Z ¯
x′ are both inﬁnite for any n-tuple ¯x′. Given
any n-tuple ¯x′ in A, the oracle which we will use can punctually list Y ¯
x′ and Z ¯
x′
and also punctually decides whether a given element is in Y ¯
x′ or if it is in Z ¯
x′ (or
neither). The deﬁnition of Y¯x and Y ¯
x′ ensures that any automorphism taking ¯x to
¯x′ will take Y¯x to Y ¯
x′ (and similarly Z¯x to Z ¯
x′). To ensure that B lies in Cf
A, take
the join of this oracle with f if necessary. Proceed through the following actions:


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
17
(1) Start oﬀby copying A into B; keep doing so until ΦB : A →B converges
on ¯x. Denote the image of ¯x by ¯x′. Since we have been naturally copying
A to B so far, we can safely identify ¯x with the respective tuple in A.
(2) Start copying only elements of Z¯x′ into B.
(3) Eventually, for some y ∈Y¯x the operator will map y to some z ∈Z¯x′.
(4) Once this is seen, resume copying A into B on all elements.
We claim that in (3) we will have diagonalised against Φ. Recall that both Y¯x and
Z¯x were invariant under ¯x-automorphism, and furthermore were composed of some
speciﬁc orbits which the oracle can produce for the given tuple ¯x. By the choice of
n, ¯x and ¯x′ are automorphic. Any automorphism of the structure taking ¯x to ¯x′
must also take Y¯x to Y ¯
x′. But we have ensured that some element of Y¯x has been
mapped Z ¯
x′ via Φ.
Case 2. There exists one coﬁnite orbit Y¯x over ¯x; denote the union of the ﬁnitely
many ﬁnite ¯x-orbits Z¯x.
As before, we intend to copy A to B.
(1) Let N be the maximal size of the use of the f-punctual Φ for all possible
oracles. It is crucial that the language of the structure is relational, and
therefore the space of possible ﬁnite partial maps from A to B is punctually
bounded and therefore we can apply the sub-recursively relativised version
of Lemma 2.2.
(2) Using the oracle, ﬁnd a subset H of A of size N with the property that for
any (n + 1)-tuple ¯w in H, the tuple is not of the form ¯x′z′, where z′ ∈Z¯x′.
(We claim that such a set can be found; to be veriﬁed later.) Copy H
into B. This ensures that Φ is not an isomorphism from A onto B, because
Φ(¯xz) must be mapped to ¯x′z′, where z′ ∈Z¯x′. But H does not contain
such tuples of length n + 1.
It remains to prove that such an H can be found.
Claim 5.3. Under the assumptions of Case 2 and for every N ∈ω there exists a
ﬁnite set H ⊆A of size N with the property that every (n + 1)-tuple ¯w in H, the
tuple is not of the form ¯x′z, where z ∈Z¯x′.
Proof of Claim. We say that z ∈A is exceptional over ¯x in A if z ∈Z¯x. Let m ∈ω
be the cardinality of Z¯x, and recall that all n-tuples are automorphic in A, by the
minimality of n. In particular, Z¯x and Z¯x′ will have the same size for any pair
of n-tuples ¯x and ¯x′. Given any ﬁnite set U of size k, the maximal number of all
possible elements exceptional over an n-tuple from U is bounded by k!
n!m, where
k!
n! is the number of n-tuples and m the number of exceptional elements over each
tuple.
In A, choose disjoint subsets K1, . . . , KN−1 of sizes
N!
n! m + 1, N!
n! m|K0| + 1, . . . , N!
n! m|K0| · . . . · |KN−2| + 1,
respectively. Fix aN ∈A which is not exceptional over any n-tuple in S
i<N Ki.
We intend to choose a1 ∈K1, . . . , aN−1 ∈KN−1 and form H to be the collection
of these ai. Each such choice leads to a potential H; there are only ﬁnitely many
such H.


18
ISKANDER KALIMULLIN, ALEXANDER MELNIKOV, AND ANTONIO MONTALBAN
Choose aN−1 from the set KN−1 so that it is not exceptional over any tuple ¯x
from any potential H (all we know about H is that it contains aN). The size of
KN−1 is large enough to exceed the maximum number of exceptional elements for
all possible choices of smaller ai, i < (N −1), in the worst possible case. Once
aN−1 is deﬁned, we proceed to aN−2, etc.
□
The claim ﬁnishes the veriﬁcation of Case 2. Since the cases are exclusive, the
theorem is proven.
□
This gives a second proof of Corollary 3.8:
Proof of Corollary 3.8. Encode a non-recursive set X into a 1-generated structure
M as in the proof of Corollary 3.8. Produce an ω-chain using a unary function s,
and use a unary predicate P to code the n-th element of the set into the n-th point
along the chain. Also, ﬁx the generator by a constant 0. The resulting structure is
u.b.c. on a cone and its Turing degree spectrum is the cone above X.
If relational structures were punctually universal, and Ψ(M) was the relational
structure punctually encoding M, then it would have to be u.p.c. on a cone and
therefore automorphically trivial.
But Ψ(M) must also have the same Turing
degree spectrum as M, because punctual universality is a stronger version of Turing
computable universality. However, any automorphically trivial structure in a ﬁnite
relational language has the trivial Turing degree spectrum {0}.
□
References
[BDKM19] Nikolay Bazhenov, Rod Downey, Iskander Kalimullin, and Alexander Melnikov. Foun-
dations of online structure theory. Bull. Symb. Log., 25(2):141–181, 2019.
[BEY98]
Allan Borodin and Ran El-Yaniv. Online computation and competitive analysis. Cam-
bridge University Press, New York, 1998.
[BHTK+]
N. Bazhenov, M. Harrison-Trainor, I. Kalimullin, A. Melnikov, and K. M. Ng. Au-
tomatic and polynomial-time algebraic structures. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, in
print.
[DGM+19] R Downey, N. Greenberg, A. Melnikov, K.M. Ng, and D. Turetsky. Punctual cate-
goricity and universality. Preprint, 2019.
[DHTK+]
R. Downey, M. Harrison-Trainor, I. Kalimullin, A. Melnikov, and D. Turetsky. Graphs
are not universal for online computablility. Preprint.
[DKL+15]
Rodney G. Downey, Asher M. Kach, Steﬀen Lempp, Andrew E. M. Lewis-Pye, Anto-
nio Montalb´an, and Daniel D. Turetsky. The complexity of computable categoricity.
Adv. Math., 268:423–466, 2015.
[DMN]
Rod Downey, Alexander Melnikov, and Keng Meng Ng. Foundations of online struc-
ture theory, ii. To appear.
[Kie81]
H. A. Kierstead. An eﬀective version of Dilworth’s theorem. Trans. Am. Math. Soc.,
268:63–77, 1981.
[KMN17]
Iskander Kalimullin, Alexander Melnikov, and Keng Meng Ng. Algebraic structures
computable without delay. Theoret. Comput. Sci., 674:73–98, 2017.
[KMnN17] I. Sh. Kalimullin, A. G. Mel′ nikov, and K. M. Ng. Diﬀerent versions of categoricity
without delays. Algebra Logika, 56(2):256–266, 2017.
[KN08]
Bakhadyr Khoussainov and Anil Nerode. Open questions in the theory of automatic
structures. Bull. Eur. Assoc. Theor. Comput. Sci. EATCS, (94):181–204, 2008.
[Mel17]
Alexander G. Melnikov. Eliminating Unbounded Search in Computable Algebra, pages
77–87. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017.
[Mon13]
Antonio Montalb´an. A computability theoretic equivalent to Vaught’s conjecture. Adv.
Math., 235:56–73, 2013.
[Mon17]
Antonio Montalb´an. Eﬀectively existentially-atomic structures. In Computability and
complexity, volume 10010 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 221–237. Springer,
Cham, 2017.


PUNCTUAL DEFINABILITY ON STRUCTURES
19
[Rog87]
H. Rogers. Theory of recursive functions and eﬀective computability. MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, second edition, 1987.
Kazan Federal University
Email address: ikalimul@gmail.com
Massey University
Email address: alexander.g.melnikov@gmail.com
University of California at Berkeley
Email address: antonio@math.berkeley.edu
