Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for
classes of structures
Antonio Montalb´an∗
Abstract. In this paper, we survey recent work in the study of classes of structures from
the viewpoint of computability theory. We consider diﬀerent ways of classifying classes
of structures in terms of their global properties, and see how those aﬀect the structures
inside the class.
On one extreme, we have the classes that are Σ-small.
These are
the classes which realize only countably many ∃-types, and are characterized by having
tame computability theoretic behavior. On the opposite end, we look at various notions
of completeness for classes which imply that all possible behaviors occur among their
structures. We introduce a new notion of completeness, that of being on top for eﬀective-
bi-interpretability, which is stronger and more structurally oriented than the previously
proposed notions.
Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation (2010). Primary 03D45; Secondary 03C57.
Keywords. Sigma small classes, back-and-forth relations, rice relations, low property,
bf-ordinal, eﬀective-bi-interpretability.
1. Introduction
In this paper, we survey recent work on the study of classes of structures from
the viewpoint of computability theory. By classes of structures we mean classes
like the one of ﬁelds or of p-groups or of linear orderings. Our general objective
is to consider global properties of the classes and derive properties about their
individual structures.
Computable structure theory is an area inside computability theory and logic
that is concerned with the computable aspects of mathematical objects and con-
structions. In particular, we are interested in the interplay between structure and
complexity, or in other words, in understanding how the algebraic properties of a
structure interact with its computational properties. For instance, we ask questions
like the following: What kind of information can be encoded into an isomorphism
∗The author was partially supported the Packard Fellowship. The author would like to thank
Matthew Harrison-Trainor and Noah Schweber for useful comments on an earlier draft of this
paper.
0 Saved: Submitted on March 28, 2014
Compiled: March 28, 2014


2
Antonio Montalb´an
type of a structure?
How diﬃcult is it to represent a certain structure?
How
diﬃcult is it to recognize it?
When we consider classes of structures, there are two ends of the spectrum.
On the one end are the classes which have some global property restricting the
behavior of their structures. On the other end are the classes which are complete
in the sense that they allow all possible behaviors to happen. Let us say a bit more
about these two extremes.
Tame classes. In Section 2, we will review some concepts we will need later.
One notion of simplicity is that of a class having a bound on the Scott rank of
its structures. These classes are not necessarily that simple from a computational
viewpoint, and much less from the viewpoint of Borel equivalence relations. How-
ever, for natural classes this bound tends to be quite low, which makes them easier
to analyze. The Scott rank of a structure is related to the number of Turing jumps
necessary to fully understand it, and hence, the lower the Scott rank, the more
manageable the structure.
A second notion of simplicity, one we believe is the most relevant to computabil-
ity theory, is that of Σ-smallness, or actually eﬀective Σ-smallness. This notion
is studied in Section 3. The author started studying such classes in [Mon10b],1
although the term “Σ-small” is new.
Deﬁnition 1.1. A class of structures K is Σ-small if it realizes countably many
∃-types, that is, if the set
{∃-tpA(¯a) : A ∈K, ¯a ∈A<ω}
is countable, where
∃-tpA(¯a) = {ϕ : ϕ(¯x) is a ﬁrst order existential formula with A |= ϕ(¯a)}.
We remark that knowing the ∃-type of ¯a is equivalent to knowing what ﬁnite
sub-structures we can ﬁnd in A extending ¯a. This is not entirely correct when L is
inﬁnite, where we need to consider sub-structures which only mention only a ﬁnite
number of the symbols in L. Another remark is that the types above are without
parameters.
We start Section 3 by developing the eﬀective version of this notion. The ef-
fectiveness assumption is not that strong, as it holds of all the examples we have
analyzed. A large list of examples can be found in Subsection 3.1. We then study
the role of Σ-small classes in many topics that have been widely studied in com-
putable structure theory: Richter’s extendibility condition, jumps of structures, the
low property, the categoricity property and the Turing ordinal. As more evidence
towards its naturalness, we will see in Theorems 3.14 and 3.15 how Σ-smallness
induces a strong dichotomy on classes.
1In [Mon10b] we used the phrase “K has a computable 1-back-and-forth structure” for what
we now say “K is eﬀectively Σ-small.”


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
3
Complete classes. In Section 4, we review various ways of mapping structures
from one class into another. For each of these reducibilities we have classes that
are on top in the sense that all other classes can be reduced to it. We start with the
well-known notion of Borel reducibility, and then move on to eﬀective reducibility
and Turing-computable reducibility, and to classes that are complete in the sense
of Hirschfeldt, Khoussainov, Shore and Slinko.
In Section 5, we develop a new and stronger notion of reducibility based on the
idea of eﬀective-bi-interpretability between structures. We do not know that much
about this new notion, but we do show that it preservers even more computational
properties than all the previous reducibilities.
Properties on a cone. There are many properties in computability theory which
tend to behave nicely when we have a nice natural class of structures, but that
do not in general. One can often build strange and unnatural classes of struc-
tures where these nice behaviors do not occur. In this paper, we are interested in
properties that hold of natural classes. Since we cannot quantify over “all natural
classes,” we often use the technical device of considering properties on a cone.
When we have a computability theoretic property P, we can often consider
its relativization P X for a given oracle X ∈2ω. We then consider the properties
relatively-P, which means that P X holds for all X, and P on a cone, which means
that there is a Z ∈2ω such that P X holds for all X ≥T Z. When we have a
proof that a natural property P holds (or does not hold) when applied to a natural
object, this proof almost always relativizes. Thus, we have a proof of relatively-P,
and in particular, of P on a cone. So, if our objects are natural, we should not
care whether we are using P, relatively-P, or P on a cone. However, due to the
unnatural examples, many results can only be proved in general if we consider the
properties on a cone. Such results usually call for a further analysis of its degree
of eﬀectiveness – we will not concentrate on this here.
Disclaimer. This paper does not pretend to be exhaustive. What it attempts
is to convey the author’s viewpoint, unifying many ideas that have been ﬂoating
around for a while. The choice of topics and how much attention they receive is
purely motivated by the author’s taste, the author’s own work, and the new ideas
the author wants to develop.
Background and notation. We only consider countable structures through-
out, so “structure” means “countable structure.” We only consider relational lan-
guages, as we do not lose any generality for our purposes.
The languages we
consider are all computable: that is, if L consists of relations Ri for i ∈I, where
I ⊆ω and Ri has arity a(i), the function a: I →ω is computable. (This only
matters when L is inﬁnite.)
A presentation of a structure A, or a copy of A, is just a structure B isomorphic
to A whose domain is a subset of ω. This allows us to use everything we know about
computable functions on ω to study B. Given a presentation A = (A; RA
i , i ∈I),


4
Antonio Montalb´an
with A ⊆ω, we let
D(A)
=
A ⊕
M
i∈I
RA
i
⊆
ω ⊔
G
i∈I
ωa(i).
Via standard coding, we then think of D(A) as a subset of ω, or equivalently a
sequence in 2ω. Note that D(A) is essentially the atomic diagram of A. When we
say that the presentation A computes X, or is computable in Y , we mean that
D(A) computes X or is computable in Y . By a class of L-structures we mean a set
K of presentations of L-structures which is closed under isomorphism. We often
think of K and of {D(A) : A ∈K} ⊆2ω as the same thing, and hence treat K as
a class of reals.
We will often consider the inﬁnity language Lω1,ω, where countably inﬁnite
conjunctions and disjunctions are allowed, and its computable version, where these
conjunctions and disjunctions must be computable. See [AK00, Sections 6 and 7].
We use Σin
α to denote the inﬁnitary Σα formulas and Σc
α to denote the computably
inﬁnitary Σα formulas. For the Scott rank of a structure A we use the following
deﬁnition: SR(A) is the least α such that every automorphism orbit in A is Σin
α -
deﬁnable without parameters. There are various deﬁnitions of Scott rank in the
literature that give slightly diﬀerent values (see [AK00, Section 6.7]). The reason
we prefer ours is that it matches better with other complexity measures used in
computability theory and descriptive set theory (see [Monc]).
2. Axiomatization and the isomorphism problem
The ﬁrst measure of the complexity for a class is in terms of its complexity as a
set of reals. This is directly connected with the complexity of the class in terms of
its axiomatizations:
Theorem 2.1. (Lopez-Escobar [LE65]) Let K ⊆2ω be a class of presentations of
structures closed under isomorphisms. Then K is Σ0
α in the Borel hierarchy if and
only if K is axiomatizable by an inﬁnitary Σin
α sentence.
The lightface version of this theorem is also true: K is lightface Σ0
α if and only
if it is axiomatizable by a computably inﬁnitary Σc
α formula [VB07].
Not all nice classes of structures are Lω1,ω-axiomatizable, or equivalently Borel,
as for instance the class of ordinals, which is Π1
1-complete. We, however, are mostly
interested in Lω1,ω-axiomatizable classes. Most of the natural classes we consider
are actually Πc
2-axiomatizable, so we will sometimes make this assumption when
we prove general results.
The second measure of complexity is the diﬃculty in telling apart diﬀerent
structures in K. This is captured by the set
{⟨D(A), D(B)⟩: A, B ∈K, A ∼= B}
⊆
(2ω)2,
usually called the isomorphism problem for K. For a Borel class of structures, this
set is Σ1
1. For some classes, like linear orderings, this problem is Σ1
1-complete.


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
5
For other classes, this problem is quite simple, like Q-vector spaces for which it
is Π0
3-complete. If we assume ZFC+∀X (X♯exists), then non-Borel isomorphism
problem must be Σ1
1-complete. This follows from Wadge’s theorem (see [Mos80,
Lemma 7D.3]), as every set that is not Π1
1, is Σ1
1-hard.
Theorem 2.2. ([BK96, Corollary 7.14]) Let K be an Lω1,ω-axiomatizable class.
The following are equivalent:
(1) The isomorphism problem for K is Borel.
(2) K has bounded Scott rank.
When we say that K has bounded Scott rank we mean {SR(A) : A ∈K} has a
supremum β < ω1. For example, the classes of Q-vector spaces and of algebraically
closed ﬁelds have bound 2 on their Scott ranks. The classes of equivalence struc-
tures and of torsion free abelian groups of ﬁnite rank have bound 3.
A simple remark is that if K has countably many structures (up to isomorphism,
of course), it has bounded Scott rank. It follows from the model-theoretic Martin’s
conjecture that if K has a ﬁrst order axiomatization and countably many structures,
then ω + ω is a bound for the Scott ranks of the structures in K (see [Gao01] for
the statement of Martin’s conjecture). For more on how high this bound can be
see [Mar90, Sac07].
3. Σ-Small classes of structures
In this section, we see how the notion of Σ-small class connects with a lot of
well-known concepts in computable structure theory.
Before looking at examples among familiar classes, let us introduce the eﬀective
version of this deﬁnition. If K is a natural class of structures and it is Σ-small, we
have a natural countable collection of ∃-types. It is then reasonable to expect that
one can list, compare and manipulate these types. An eﬀectively Σ-small class is
one where we can do this computably:
Deﬁnition 3.1. A Σ-small class K is eﬀectively Σ-small if there is a computable list
{pi : i ∈ω} of computable ∃-types listing all the ∃-types realized in K without rep-
etitions, where the operations of erasing and permuting variables are computable,
and deciding inclusion of ∃-types is also computable.2
3.1. Examples. All the classes of structures below are Σ-small. It is worth
remarking that most of the examples mentioned below have been attractive to com-
putability theorists for a long time because they enjoy nice computability properties
other classes do not.
Vector spaces (over a ﬁxed computable ﬁeld F). If K has only countably many
structures, it is clearly Σ-small. Proving that F-vector spaces are eﬀectively
Σ-small requires understanding their ∃-types, which is not hard to do.
2The exact list of properties that are required for a class to be eﬀectively Σ-small is currently
work in progress, and so far they are motivated from what we see in applications.


6
Antonio Montalb´an
Algebraically closed ﬁelds. Same as above.
Diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds of characteristic 0 (DCF0). They are Σ-small be-
cause they are ω-stable. The class of models of an ω-stable theory is always
Σ-small, as even using countably many parameters and full ﬁrst-order types,
there are still countably many types. It has not been veriﬁed whether DCF0
is eﬀectively Σ-small or not.
Abelian p-groups. That Abelian p-groups are eﬀectively Σ-small follows from
work of Khisamiev [Khi04].
Equivalence structures. We refer the reader to [Mon10b, Section 4.2] for an
analysis of the ∃-types on equivalence structures.
Trees (as partial orderings). By ’trees’ we mean downward closed subsets of ω<ω.
That they are eﬀectively Σ-small in the language of partial orderings follows
from Richter’s work [Ric81]. Let us remark that a key tool in her proof is
Kruskal’s theorem [Kru60] on the well-quasi-ordering of ﬁnite trees.
Trees of ﬁnite height (as graphs). The proof is like the case above using Kruskal’s
theorem for ﬁnite trees of a ﬁxed height.
Linear orderings. All an ∃-type can say about a tuple ¯a = ⟨a0, ..., ak−1⟩is the
order among the elements of the tuple and, for each n ∈ω and each i, j < |¯a|,
whether there are at least n elements between ai and aj. Thus, existential
types are determined by the number of elements between the elements of the
tuple, and hence there are countably many of them. One can also use this
to prove they are eﬀectively Σ-small.
Linear orderings with an added relation for adjacency. When we add the
adjacency relation, the ∃-types get a bit more complicated, but they are still
eﬀective and countable (see [Mon10b, Section 4.1]).
Boolean algebras. All an ∃-type can say about a tuple is how many elements
are below each Boolean combination of the elements of the tuple. These are,
again, not that diﬃcult to analyze.
Boolean algebras with an added relation that identiﬁes atoms. What makes
Boolean algebras particularly interesting is that they remain Σ-small even
if we add to them any Σin
<ω relation. For instance, we can add all of the
relations used by Knight and Sob [KS00] (atom, atomless, inﬁnite, atomic,
1-atomic, atominf, ∼-inf, Int(ω + η), infatomicless, 1-atomless, and nomax-
atomless) and they remain eﬀectively Σ-small. An in-depth analysis of the
Σin
n -types of Boolean algebras was done by Harris and Montalb´an in [HM12].
The fact that there are countably many of them uses key ideas from work of
Flum and Ziegler [FZ80].
Generalized Boolean algebras. These are distributive lattices with 0 and where
every interval [a, b] is a Boolean algebra. They are usually known in Russia


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
7
as Ershov algebras. That they are eﬀectively Σ-small follows from work of
Khisamiev [Khi04].
3.2. Richter’s computable extendibility condition. In her Ph.D.
thesis3 [Ric77], Linda Richter introduced the computable extendibility condition in
order to show that there are structures that do not have Turing degree as deﬁned
by Jockusch. (A structure A has Turing degree x if x computes a copy of A, and
every copy of A computes x.)
Deﬁnition 3.2. [Ric81, Section 3] A structure A has the computable extendibility
condition if each ∃-type realized in A is computable. A structure A has the c.e.
extendibility condition if each ∃-type realized in A is c.e.
Richter’s original deﬁnition was not in terms of types but in terms of ﬁnite
structures extending a ﬁxed tuple. As we mentioned right after Deﬁnition 1.1, these
formulations are equivalent. The c.e. extendibility condition was not considered
by Richter, but we include it here because it makes Theorem 3.3 below more
rounded. In Russia, structures with the c.e. extendibility condition are said to be
locally constructivizable.
Of course, if K is eﬀectively Σ-small, then every structure A in K satisﬁes the
computable extendibility condition. On the other hand, if every structure in K
satisﬁes the c.e. extendibility condition, then K is Σ-small, because there are only
countably many c.e. sets. Furthermore, the proofs in the literature that linear
orderings, Boolean algebras and trees (as posets) in [Ric77, Ric81] and p-groups
and generalized Boolean algebras in [Khi04] satisfy the computable extendibility
condition are essentially proofs that these classes are eﬀectively Σ-small.
The reason Richter introduced this notion is to prove the following theorem
and its corollary below.
Theorem 3.3. (Essentially Richter) Let A be any structure. The following are
equivalent:
(1) A has the c.e. extendibility condition.
(2) Every set X ⊆ω which is c.e. in every presentation of A is already c.e.
Proof. That (1) implies (2) is essentially the same proof as [Ric81, Theorem 3.1].
For the other direction, notice that every ∃-type realized in A is c.e. in every
presentation of A.
2
Corollary 3.4. If A has the c.e. extendibility condition and has Turing degree x,
then x = 0.
We can read Theorem 3.3 as saying that structures in an eﬀectively Σ-small
class cannot directly encode any non-trivial information. In a sense, Σ-smallness
is not only a suﬃcient, but also a necessary condition for this to be the case. The
following theorem shows that if K is not Σ-small, quite the opposite happens: every
real is coded by some structure in K in a left-c.e. way. We recall that X ∈2ω is
3directed by Carl Jockusch


8
Antonio Montalb´an
left-c.e. in A ∈2ω if the set {σ ∈2<ω : σ ≤lex X} is c.e. in A, or equivalently, if
there is an A-computable approximation to X from the left.
Theorem 3.5. [Mon10b, Theorem 3.1] Let K be an Lω1,ω-axiomatizable class of
structures. The following are equivalent:
(1) K is not Σ-small.
(2) Relative to every oracle on a cone, the following holds: For every Y ∈2ω,
there is a structure A ∈K such that Y is left-c.e. in every copy of A.
Part (2) of the theorem can be strengthened by changing “left-c.e.” to just “c.e.”
in most cases. However, an example where left-c.e.ness is required is constructed
in [Mon10a, Section 2.2].
3.3. Complete sets of r.i.c.e. relations. Another advantage of Σ-small
classes is that they have nice structural jumps.
We will see below how, when
we have a Σ-small class K, we usually have a nice and simple set of relations
that give us all the structural information about the jump of the structures in K.
Understanding these complete sets of relations is usually very useful in applications.
Before talking about the jump, we need a notion of c.e.-ness among the relations
on a structure. We will then look at complete relations among these and use them
to deﬁne the jump of a structure. An equivalent notion of jump for a structure was
originally deﬁned by I. Soskov [Bal06], although he used a very diﬀerent format.
The deﬁnition we use here is in the spirit of that introduced in [Mon09] (see [Mon12,
Deﬁnition 1.2] for more historical remarks).
Deﬁnition 3.6. A relation R ⊆A<ω is relatively intrinsically computably enu-
merable (r.i.c.e.) if, on every copy (B, RB) of (A, R), we have that RB (viewed as
a subset of ω<ω) is c.e. in D(B).
Example 3.7. Over a Q-vector space, the relation of linear dependence is r.i.c.e.;
Over a ring, the relation that holds of (r0, ..., rk) if the polynomial r0+r1x+...+rkxk
has a root is r.i.c.e.
This deﬁnition gives a notion of c.e.-ness that we can use to deﬁne other stan-
dard concepts from computability theory on the subsets of A<ω.
Deﬁnition 3.8. A relation R ⊆A<ω is relatively intrinsically (r.i.) computable if
it and its complement are both r.i.c.e. R is r.i. computable in Q ⊆A<ω if R is r.i.
computable in (A, Q). A partial function f : A<ω ⇀A<ω is partial r.i. computable
if its graph is a r.i.c.e. subset of (A<ω)2.
Remark 3.9. The use of subsets of A<ω not only allows us to consider sequences
of subsets of An for all n uniformly, but essentially all ﬁnite objects that can be
built over A. For instance, given Q ⊆(A<ω)2, let us deﬁne R ⊆A<ω by ¯b ∈R iﬀ
|¯b| = ⟨n, m⟩for some n, m ∈ω and ((b0, ...., bn−1), (bn, ..., bn+m−1)) ∈Q. We then
have that Q is r.i.c.e. (as in Deﬁnition 3.6 but for subsets of (A<ω)2) if and only if
R is r.i.c.e. In a similar way, we can code subsets of (A<ω)<ω by subsets of A<ω.
Given R, Q ⊆A<ω, we deﬁne R ⊕Q by ¯b ∈R ⊕Q if either |¯b| = 2n and ¯b ↾n ∈R
or |¯b| = 2n + 1 and ¯b ↾n ∈Q. We can also encode a set X ⊆ω by a set ⃗X ⊂A<ω


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
9
by letting ¯b ∈⃗X if and only if |¯b| ∈X. With a bit more work, we can encode any
subset of HF(A) (the hereditarily ﬁnite extension of A) as a subset of A<ω (see
[Mon12, Section]).
R.i.c.e. relations can be characterized in a purely syntactic way, without re-
ferring to the diﬀerent copies of the structure, using Σc
1 formulas. Recall that a
Σc formula is just a computable disjunction of ∃-formulas over a ﬁnite set of free
variables.
Theorem 3.10 (Ash, Knight, Manasse, Slaman [AKMS89]; Chisholm [Chi90]).
Let A be a structure, and R ⊆A<ω a relation on it. The following are equivalent:
(1) R is r.i.c.e.
(2) R is uniformly deﬁnable by Σc
1 formulas with parameters from A. That is,
there is a tuple ¯a ∈A<ω and a computable sequence of Σc
1 formulas ϕi(x1, ..., x|¯a|, y1, ..., yi),
for i ∈ω, such that
(∀¯b ∈A<ω) ¯b ∈R ⇐⇒A |= ϕ|¯b|(¯a,¯b).
Deﬁnition 3.11. A relation R ⊆A<ω is r.i.c.e. complete in A if it is r.i.c.e. and
every other r.i.c.e. relation Q ⊆A<ω is r.i. computable from R.
R.i.c.e. complete relations always exist. For instance, we can consider the analog
of Kleene’s predicate K: If we let ϕi,j(y1, ..., yj) be the ith Σc
1 formula of arity j,
then the relation ⃗KA ⊆A<ω × ω deﬁned by
(¯b, i) ∈⃗KA ⇐⇒A |= ϕi,|¯b|(¯b)
is r.i.c.e. complete.
Deﬁnition 3.12. [Mon12] We deﬁne the jump of A to be the structure A′ =
(A, ⃗KA). Given a class K, we let K′ = {A′ : A ∈K}.
If X ⊆ω is a c.e. set, then ⃗X ⊆A<ω (as in Remark 3.9) is clearly r.i.c.e. It
follows that ⃗0′ must be r.i. computable in every r.i.c.e. complete relation. On some
structures, like (ω; 0, 1, +), ⃗0′ is r.i.c.e. complete, but this is always not the case.
If A is a linear ordering, then co-Adj ⊕⃗0′ is r.i.c.e. complete, where co-Adj is the
complement of the adjacency relation. For most linear orderings co-Adj is not r.i.
computable from ⃗0′.
Deﬁnition 3.13. We say that R is structurally r.i.c.e. complete if R ⊕⃗0′ is r.i.c.e.
complete. We then say that (A, R) is a structural jump of A.
So, for a linear ordering L, (L, co-Adj) is a structural jump.
The author showed in [Mon10b] that if K is Σ-small, there is a countable
sequence of Σin
1 formulas which deﬁne a structurally complete r.i.c.e. relation in
all the structures in K relative to every oracle on a cone.


10
Antonio Montalb´an
Theorem 3.14. ([Mon10b]) Let K be eﬀectively Σ-small, and let {pi : i ∈ω} be
a computable list of all the ∃-types realized in K. Then, the Σc
1 formulas
ϕi ≡
_
{ψ : ψ is an ∃-formula, and ψ ̸∈pi},
for i ∈ω deﬁne a structurally r.i.c.e. complete relation on all structures in K.
In most natural examples, we can ﬁnd simpler structurally r.i.c.e. complete
relations than the one given by Theorem 3.14. For instance, on Q-vector spaces
and algebraically closed ﬁelds, the relations of linear dependence and algebraic
dependence are structurally r.i.c.e. complete, and on Boolean algebras, the not-
atom relation is structurally r.i.c.e. complete.
It is also shown in [Mon10b] that this is not the case when K is not Σ-small:
there is no sequence of formulas which works for all structures simultaneously.
Theorem 3.15. If K is not Σ-small, there is no computable sequence of Σc
1-
formulas deﬁning a structurally r.i.c.e. complete relation simultaneously on all
structures in K.
3.4. The low property. The low property has been studied for various
classes in the last couple of decades. Only recently has it been looked at a general
setting.
Deﬁnition 3.16. A class K has the low property if every low presentation A ∈K
has a computable copy.
We recall that a set X ⊆ω is low if X′ is computable from 0′. A presentation
A is low if D(A) is.
Jockusch and Soare [JS91] proved that the class of linear orderings does not have
the low property, that is, that there is a low linear ordering without a computable
copy. Downey and Jockusch [DJ94] proved that the class of Boolean algebras has
the low property. In that paper, they asked the following question, that is still
open despite the eﬀorts of various researches:
Question 1. Does every lown Boolean algebras have a computable copy?
Some partial results are known. Thurber [Thu95] proved that Boolean algebras
have the low2 property and Knight and Stob [KS00] the low4 property. The low5
property is still open. Harris and Montalb´an showed that the diﬃculty at level 5
is not just that it needs one more jump, but a qualitatively new behavior: to show
this behavioral diﬀerence is essential, they produced a low5 Boolean algebra not
0(7)-isomorphic to any computable one – for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, it was known that every
lown Boolean algebra is 0(n+2)-isomorphic to a computable one.
Let us review some of the other examples. The class of equivalence structures
does not have the low property. However, the class of equivalence structures with
inﬁnitely many inﬁnite equivalence classes has the low property, as it follows from
[CCHM06, Lemmas 2.2.(c) and 2.3]. Even if linear orderings do not have the low
property, some sub-classes do. For instance, the class of all linear orderings where
all elements have successor and predecessors does. More examples can be found


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
11
in [ATF09, Fro10, Fro12]. The class of linear orderings with only ﬁnitely many
descending sequences (up to equivalence) was proved to have the lown property
for all n by Kach and Montalb´an [KM11] (where two sequences are equivalent if
they determine the same cut). It is open whether scattered linear orderings have
the low property. The class of ordinals not only has the low property, but the
lowα-property for all computable ordinals α. Classes that have the lowα-property
for all α < ωCK
1
are said to satisfy hyperarithmetic-is-recursive, that is, every
hyperarithmetic structure in the class has a computable copy. We will get back to
these classes in Theorem 3.26.
All the examples of classes with the low property we know are Σ-small. This
happens for a reason:
Theorem 3.17. Let K be a Πin
2 -class. If K has the low property on a cone, then
K is Σ-small.
Sketch of the proof. It follows from the author’s construction in [Mon10b, Lemma
2.9 and Theorem 3.1] that if K is not Σ-small, there is an oracle relative to which
the following happens: For every X ∈2ω and Y c.e. in X, there is a structure A
in K computable from X and such that Y is left-c.e. in every copy of A. All we
need to do now is observe that there is a set that is c.e. over a low set but not
left-c.e. For instance, Chaitin’s Ωrelativized to low 1-random real R is c.e. in R
and, since it is 2-random, is not of c.e. degree. Thus {σ ∈2<ω : σ ≤lex ΩR} is c.e.
in R but not left-c.e (because left-c.e. sets have c.e. degree).
2
3.5. Listable classes. The author started looking at this property with the
intention of characterizing the low property.
Deﬁnition 3.18. A class K is listable if there exists a Turing functional which,
for every oracle X, produces an X-computable sequence of structures listing all
the X-computable structures in K (allowing repetitions).
This deﬁnition appeared ﬁrst in [Mon13b], but the underlying idea of consid-
ering classes whose computable models can be listed computably is much older.
However, the uniformity in Deﬁnition 3.18 is needed to get the consequences we
want. Nurtazin [Nur74], almost four decades ago, gave a suﬃcient condition for
a class of structures to be listable which includes the classes of linear orderings,
Boolean algebras, equivalence structures, Abelian p-groups, and algebraic ﬁelds of
characteristic p. Nurtazin’s result says that, if there exists a computable structure
in the class such that any other structure can be embedded into it, and such that
any subset of that structure generates a structure in the class, then the class is
listable (see [GN02, Theorem 5.1]). Nurtazin’s condition is not a necessary condi-
tion for a class to be listable, and for many of the cases we are interested in, it is
too strong.
The more general way of proving that a class is listable is by a priority argument,
where one monitors all computable functions and tries to list the ones that code
structures in the class. In [Mon13b], the author developed a game, G∞(K), that
captures the combinatorial argument behind these constructions. This game is


12
Antonio Montalb´an
played by two players, C and D. Along the game, player C builds an inﬁnite list of
structures in K via ﬁnite approximations, adding a new element to each structure
in each move. Player D, however, builds only one structure and he is allowed to
wait and only add elements to his structure when he thinks it is worth it. Player
C’s goal is to get one of his structures to be isomorphic to D’s structure (i.e. “to
copy”), while D’s goal is to diagonalize. See [Mon13b] for a more detailed deﬁnition
and for other related games. The classes K for which C has a winning strategy are
said to be ∞-copyable.
The connection between listability, the low property, and the games was unex-
pected.
Theorem 3.19. ([Mon13b]) Let K be a Πin
2 class of structures. The following are
equivalent:
(1) K has the low property on a cone.
(2) K is Σ-small and K′ is listable on a cone.
(3) K is Σ-small and K′ is ∞-copyable.
3.6. Computable categoricity. The objective of this subsection is to ar-
gue that computable categoricity is easier to analyze on Σ-small classes.
The notion of computable categoricity has been studied intensively for the
past few decades. A feature of computable structure theory is that computational
properties of presentations need not be invariant under isomorphism, and instead
they are invariant under computable isomorphisms. In other words, a structure can
have two isomorphic computable presentations which have diﬀerent computational
properties.
For instance, there are computable presentations of the countable,
inﬁnite-dimensional Q-vector space, Q∞, where all the ﬁnite-dimensional subspaces
are computable, and computable presentations of Q∞where no ﬁnite-dimensional
subspace is computable (see [DHK+07]). The computably categorical structures
are exactly the ones where this does not happen:
Deﬁnition 3.20. A computable structure A is computably categorical if between
any two computable copies of A there is a computable isomorphism.
There are many results classifying the computably categorical structures within
certain classes.
A linear order is computably categorical if and only if it has
ﬁnitely many adjacencies (Dzgoev and Goncharov [GD80]); a Boolean algebra is
computably categorical if and only if it has ﬁnitely many atoms (Goncharov, and
independently La Roche [LR78]); a Q-vector space is computably categorical if and
only if it has ﬁnite dimension; a p-group is computably categorical if and only if it
can be written in one of the following forms: (i) (Z(p∞))ℓ⊕G for ℓ∈ω ∪{∞} and
G ﬁnite, or (ii) (Z(p∞))n ⊕(Zpk)∞⊕G where G is ﬁnite, and n, k ∈ω (Goncharov
[Gon80] and Smith [Smi81]); a tree of ﬁnite height is computably categorical if and
only if it is of ﬁnite type (Lempp, McCoy, R. Miller, and Solomon [LMMS05]); and
so on.
There are also many classes where computably categoricity is quite diﬃcult to
describe. Indeed, it was recently proved by Downey, Kach, Lempp, Lewis, Mon-
talb´an and Turetsky [DKL+] that the index set of computable categorical struc-


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
13
tures is Π1
1-complete. The relativized notion is, however, much better behaved and
usually easier to characterize (recall the notions of “relatively P” and “P on a cone”
from Section 1). A nice characterization of the relatively computably categorical
structures was given by Goncharov [Gon77]: they are exactly the atomic models,
over a ﬁnite set of parameters, where all the types are generated by ∃-formulas,
and there is a c.e. listing of those formulas. The author [Monc] has recently found
that there is an even nicer characterization of the structures which are computably
categorical on a cone. They are exactly the ones that have a Σin
3 Scott sentence.
The classes where we have the best hope of characterizing computable categoricity
are the ones where the three notions of computable categoricity – plain, relative,
and on a cone – coincide.
Deﬁnition 3.21. We say that K has the categoricity property if every computably
categorical structure in K is relatively computably categorical.
Q-vectors spaces, algebraically closed ﬁelds, Boolean algebras, linear orderings,
equivalence structures, trees (as posets), ordered abelian groups, and p-groups all
have the categoricity property.
Conjecture 1. Every Σ-small Πin
2 -class K satisﬁes the categoricity property on a
cone.
One thing we know is that Σ-small Πin
2 -classes always contain structures which
are categorical on a cone [Monc].
3.7. The back-and-forth ordinal. It is not hard to observe that Σc
2 types
over a structure A are equivalent to ∃-types over A′, and Σc
3-types to ∃-types over
A′′. One can use this to get, for instance, that a structure is ∆0
2-categorical on a
cone if and only if it is A′ is computably categorical on a cone; or that a a class K
has the low2 property on a cone if and only if both K and K′ have the low property
on a cone. Thus, understanding K′ can be helpful for the understanding of these
higher-level properties. If we have an eﬀectively Σ-small class K, we have a nice
and uniform notion of jump among the structures in K (Theorem 3.14). We then
want to know if K′ is eﬀectively Σ-small. If it is, we can then consider K′′ and ask
if it is Σ-small.
Deﬁnition 3.22. K is Σin
α -small if it realizes countably many Σin
α types.
The eﬀective notion of Σin
n -smallness is considered in [Mon10b, Mon13a] under
the name “eﬀective n-back-and-forth structure.” We omit the deﬁnition here. In
[Mon10b], we proved that on Σin
n -small classes have nice Σc
n-complete relations and
that no set can be coded in the (n −1)st jump of their structures. An opposite
behaviour happens, on a cone, for structures that are not Σin
n -small. Thus, for a
class K, there is a qualitative jump in behavior from the α’s at which K is Σin
α -small
to the ones where it is not.
Deﬁnition 3.23. The bf-ordinal of a class of structures K is the least α ∈ω1 + 1
such that K is not Σin
α -small, and we let it be ∞if there is no such α.


14
Antonio Montalb´an
The notion of bf-ordinal is quite close to the notion of “Turing-ordinal” intro-
duced by Jockusch and Soare [JS94].
Deﬁnition 3.24. A structure A has βth jump Turing degree x if the βth jump of
every copy of A computes x, and x computes the βth jump of some copy of A.
A class K has Turing-ordinal τ if for all β < τ, whenever a structure in K has
βth-jump Turing degree, it is 0(β), while for all x ≥T 0(τ), there is a structure in
K with τth-jump Truing degree x.
Theorem 3.25. Let K be a Πin
2 -class with bf-ordinal τ < ω1, and suppose that it
has Turing ordinal on a cone. Then, on a cone, K has Turing ordinal either τ or
τ + 1.
Sketch of the proof. This sketches assumes familiarity with either [Mon10b, Proof
of theorem 3.1] or [Mon13a, Section 5]. Since for all γ < τ, K is Σin
γ -small, on a
cone the greatest lower bound of each degree spectrum of structures in K is 0(γ).
On the other hand, since K is not Σin
τ -small, there is a perfect tree T of ∃-types over
the language Lτ as in [Mon10b, Proof of theorem 3.1] and also [Mon13a, Section
5]. Let us relativize to that tree, and hence assume T is computable. For every
X above 0′, there is a 1-generic G such that G ⊕0′ ≡T G′ ≡T X. Then, there
is a structure Aτ ∈K computable in G realizing the ∃-type T[G] (by [Mon10b,
Lemma 2.9]). So X computes the jump of some copy of Aτ. On the other hand,
G is left-c.e. in every copy of Aτ. So, the jump of every copy of A′
τ computes G
and 0′, and hence X. It follows that A has τ + 1-jump degree X.
Thus, the Turing ordinal on a cone of K is at least τ and at most τ + 1.
2
It is not hard to see that the bf-ordinal of K is ∞if and only if it has countably
many structures. If K is an Lω1,ω-axiomatizable class, it follows from Morley’s
proof [Mor70] that, for every α < ω1, the number of Σin
α types it realizes is ei-
ther countable or continuum.
Therefore, the bf-ordinal of K is less than ω1 if
and only if K has continuum many countable models.
In the remaining case,
when the bf-ordinal of K is ω1, K must then have ℵ1 many countable models.
Vaught’s conjecture [Vau61] claims that this last case never occurs. Thus, if K is
Lω1,ω-axiomatizable and its bf-ordinal is ω1, we say that K is a counterexample to
Vaught’s conjecture.
We actually do not know any example of a Πin
α -class K whose bf-ordinal is
greater than α + ω unless it is ∞. The closest example we know is the class of
Boolean algebras which is ∀2 and has bf-ordinal ω.
Question 2. Is there a Πin
2
class K with 2ℵ0 many models whose bf-ordinal is
greater than ω?
Let us remark that question 2 asks about a strengthening of Vaught’s conjec-
ture in the opposite direction as Martin’s conjecture. Martin’s model-theoretic
conjecture is about complete ﬁrst order theories which have less than 2ℵ0 many
countable models, and implies that they all have bounded Scott rank by at most
ω + ω. Wagner had proposed a strengthening of Martin’s conjecture which in-
cluded theories with 2ℵ0 many countable models, which turned out to be false
(Gao [Gao01]).


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
15
The author found the following connection between these examples and the iter-
ates of the low-property mentioned above. Recall that K satisﬁes “hyperarithmetic-
is-recursive” if it has the lowα property for all α < ωCK
1
, which is equivalent to
saying that every hyperarithmetic structure in K has a computable copy.
Theorem 3.26. (ZFC+∀X (X♯exists)) Let K be an Lω1,ω-axiomatizable class
with uncountably many models. The following are equivalent:
(1) K is a counterexample to Vaught’s conjecture.
(2) K satisﬁes hyperarithmetic-is-recursive relative to all oracles on a cone.
The proof in [Mon13a] used projective determinacy, but this was then improved
to ∀X (X♯exists) in [Mona]. Furthermore, in [Mona] the result above is extended
to all analytic equivalence classes E: E has ℵ1 equivalence classes if and only if it
satisﬁes hyperarithmetic-is-recursive on a cone non-trivially.
The main theorem of [Mon13a] is actually stronger than Theorem 3.26. As-
suming Σ1
2-determinacy and relative to all oracles on a cone, K has the low-for-ω1
property, that is, if a structure in K has a presentation that is low-for-ω1, then it
has a computable copy. (We recall that X is low-for-ω1 if ωX
1 = ωCK
1
.)
4. Comparing the complexity of classes
Reducibilities between classes allow us to classify structures in one class in terms
of structures in another class. With this in mind, Friedman and Stanley [FS89]
deﬁned the notion of Borel reducibility. Since then, the study of Borel reducibility
on arbitrary Borel and analytic equivalence relations has been extremely active in
descriptive set theory. We concentrate here on the isomorphism relation.
Deﬁnition 4.1. (H. Friedman and L. Stanley [FS89]) A class of structures K is
Borel reducible to a class S, and we write K ≤B S, if there is a Borel function
f : 2ω →2ω that maps presentations of structures in K to structures in S and
preserves isomorphism. That is, for all A ∈K, f(D(A)) = D(B) for some B ∈S,
and if ˜
A ∈K with f(D( ˜
A)) = D( ˜B), then
A ∼= ˜
A ⇐⇒B ∼= ˜B.
(Recall that D(A) is the atomic diagram of A coded as a subset of ω.)
A class K is on top for Borel reducibility if for every language L, the class of
L-structures is Borel-reducible to K.4
They ﬁrst observed that it is enough to use the language with only one binary
relation (i.e. directed graphs) in the deﬁnition above.
Then, they built Borel
reductions to show that the classes of trees, linear orderings, 2-step nilpotent groups
4In the literature these classes are sometimes called Borel complete, but we want to avoid that
notation here. The reason is that when we say that K is Σ1
1-complete we mean that there is a
continuous reduction from any Σ1
1 subset of 2ω to the isomorphism problem of K as a set, and
not as an equivalence relation. Reductions that preserve equivalence relations are quite diﬀerent.


16
Antonio Montalb´an
and ﬁelds are all on top for Borel reducibility. Camerlo and Gao [CG01] added
Boolean algebras to that list. Friedman and Stanley observed that if a class is
on top, then its isomorphism problem must be Σ1
1-complete, giving them a whole
range of examples which are not on top for Borel reducibility. Torsion abelian
groups are an interesting class: their isomorphism problem is Σ1
1-complete, but
they are not on top for Borel reducibility [FS89, Theorem 5].
(The reason is
that their isomorphism problem can be reduced to countable subsets of ordinals
via de Ulm invariants in a constructible way, and hence E0 does not reduce to it.)
Whether torsion-free abelian groups are on top was stated as an open question then
and remains so. Since then, Downey and Montalb´an showed that their isomorphism
problem is Σ1
1-complete, using ideas of Hjorth [Hjo02]. It is also open if abelian
groups are on top.
In this paper, we are interested in eﬀective versions of this reducibility.
4.1. Eﬀective reducibility. One way of eﬀectivizing the notion of Borel
reducibility is by considering computable reductions that act on indices of com-
putable structures. There has been some recent interest on this reducibility which
has turned out to be much more interesting than expected [FF09, FFH+12, CHM12,
Monb].
Deﬁnition 4.2. We say that a class of structures K is eﬀectively reducible to a class
S if there is a computable function f : ω →ω which maps indices of computable
structures in K to indices of computable structures in S preserving isomorphism.
A class of structures K is said to be on top for eﬀective reducibility if for any
computable language L, the class of L-structures eﬀectively reduces to it.
(One could also consider hyperarithmetic reductions, but the author has re-
cently shown that, on a cone, being on top for eﬀective reducibility is equivalent
to being on top for hyperarithmetic reducibility [Monb, Theorem 1.6], and hence
does not make a diﬀerence for natural classes.)
E. Fokina, S. Friedman, V. Harizanov, J. Knight, C. MaCoy and A. Montalb´an
[FFH+12] gave proofs that linear orderings, trees, ﬁelds, p-groups and torsion-free
abelian groups are all on top. Note that this is diﬀerent from the Borel-reducibility
case where p-groups are not on top, and where it is open if abelian groups are.
It is not hard to see that if a class is on top, its isomorphism-index-set,
E(K) = {⟨n, m⟩∈ω2 : n and m are indices
for isomorphic computable structures in K},
must be Σ1
1-complete. Thus, Q-vector spaces, equivalence structures, torsion-free
abelian groups of ﬁnite rank, etc. cannot be on top because they have arithmetic
isomorphism problems. So far, this is the only way we know to produce examples
of classes which are not on top.
Deﬁnition 4.3. A class K is intermediate for eﬀective reducibility if it is not on
top for eﬀective reducibility, and its isomorphism-index-set is not hyperarithmetic.


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
17
No speciﬁc example of an intermediate class is known. Becker [Bec], and in-
dependently Knight and Montalb´an [unpublished], showed that such a class of
structures exists under the assumption that Vaught’s conjecture fails (relative to
some oracle). The question now is whether such examples can be built without
using a counterexample to Vaught’s conjecture:
Question 3. Are the following statements equivalent?
• Vaught’s conjecture.
• No Lω1,ω-axiomatizable class of structures is intermediate for eﬀective re-
ducibility, relative to every oracle on a cone.
Recent work by the author [Monb] gives a partial reversal, showing that the
second statement follows from a strengthening of Vaught’s conjecture (which might
turn out to be equivalent to Vaught’s conjecture too).
4.2. Turing-computable reducibility. The notion of Turing computable
reducibility between classes of structures was introduced by Calvert, Cummins,
Knight and S. Miller [CCKM04]. It is deﬁned exactly as Borel reducibility (Deﬁ-
nition 4.1) except that the function f is required to be a computable operator.
Deﬁnition 4.4. A class K is Turing computable reducible (tc-reducible) to S, and
we write K ≤tc S, if there is a Turing operator Φ such that for every presentation
A ∈K, ΦD(A) is the characteristic function of D(B) for some B ∈S in a way that,
if also ΦD( ˜
A) = D( ˜B), then
A ∼= ˜
A ⇐⇒B ∼= ˜B.
So, instead of working on indices, these operators act on the atomic diagrams
given as reals.
This makes more of a diﬀerence than it seems.
It is not hard
to see that tc-reducibility implies eﬀective reducibility. This implication does not
reverse, as tc-reducibility also implies Borel-reducibility, which is not implied by
eﬀective-reducibility (e.g. abelian p-groups).
A class K is then on top for tc-reducibility if for every computable language
L, the class of L-structures tc-reduces to K. All the reducibilities produced in
[FS89] are not just Borel but also eﬀective, showing that trees, linear orderings,
nilpotent groups and ﬁelds are actually on top for tc-reducibility. However, the fact
that tc-reduction is ﬁner than Borel reduction allows it to get ﬁner comparabilities
between certain classes of structures. For instance, any two classes of structures
with countably inﬁnitely many models are Borel-equivalent – this is not the case
for tc-reductions, and an interesting structure can be found among these (see
[KMVB07]). There are even classes of ﬁnite structures that are not trivial under tc-
reducibility. But the most interesting fact about tc-reducibility is that it preserves
the back-and-forth structure:
Theorem 4.5 (Pull Back theorem). (Knight, S. Miller and Vanden Boom [KMVB07])
Let Φ be a Turing computable embedding from K to S. Then, for every Πc
α-formula
ϕ, there is a Πc
α formula ϕ∗such that for all A ∈K,
A |= ϕ∗
⇐⇒
Φ(A) |= ϕ


18
Antonio Montalb´an
(where Φ(A) is the presentation B such that ΦD(A) = D(B)). It follows that if
A ≤α
˜
A, then Φ(A) ≤α Φ(B) (where ≤α is the α-back-and-forth relation as in
[AK00, Chapter 15]).
This theorem allowed Knight, S. Miller and Vanden Boom to characterize the
classes K such that K ≤tc S for certain ﬁxed classes S, like Q-vector spaces.
4.3. Completeness for degree spectrum. A stronger notion of com-
pleteness was analyzed by Hirschfeldt, Khoussainov, Shore and Slinko [HKSS02].
The idea is that these complete classes of structures contains structures exhibiting
all the possible computability theoretic behaviors that structures can have. Their
objective was to show that certain nice classes of structures are indeed complete
in this sense. Their deﬁnition is rather cumbersome, but we include it here for
completeness.
Deﬁnition 4.6. [HKSS02, Deﬁnition 1.21] A class of structures K is complete with
respect to degree spectra of nontrivial structures, eﬀective dimensions, expansion by
constants, and degree spectra of relations (which we will write as HKSS-complete) if
for every non-trivial structure G over a computable language L, there is a structure
A ∈K with the following properties:
(1) DgSp(A) = DgSp(G).
(2) If G is computably presentable, then the following holds:
(i) For any degree d, A has the same d-computable dimension as G.
(ii) If x ∈G, there is an a ∈A such that (A, a) has the same computable
dimension as (G, x).
(iii) If S ⊆G, there exists U ⊆A such that DgSpA(U) = DgSpG(S) and if S
is intrinsically c.e., then so is U.
We recall that the degree spectrum of a structure A is DgSp(A) = {X ∈2ω :
X computes a copy of A}.
They did not talk about a reducibility, but their notion can be easily be made
into a reduction.
They showed that undirected graphs, partial orderings, lattices, integral do-
mains of arbitrary characteristic (and in particular rings), commutative semi-
groups, and 2-step nilpotent groups are all HKSS-complete. Σ-small classes cannot
be HKSS-complete. This is because the degree spectrum of a structure in a Σ-small
class can never be the upper cone over a base which is higher than the complexity
of all the ∃-types realized in the structure.
We suspect that if a nice class is not on top for tc-reducibility, it should not be
HKSS-complete either.
5. Complete classes for eﬀective-bi-interpretability
In this section, we introduce a notion of completeness much stronger than the
ones above. This new notion is more structural, as its deﬁnition does not involve


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
19
presentations of structures. Its main attraction is that it preserves a whole range
of computational properties. The notion as deﬁned here is new, although it is
composed of a few already-well-known concepts. In [HKSS02], one can already
see the idea of having interpretations which are somewhat eﬀective. However, the
properties they require use presentations and are not as clean cut or as general as
the one here.
We start by introducing the notion of eﬀective-bi-interpretability which is a
variation of the classical model theoretic notion of bi-interpretability.
5.1. Eﬀective-bi-interpretability. Before looking at eﬀective-bi-interpretability,
let us consider eﬀective-interpretability in just one direction. Informally, a struc-
ture A is eﬀectively-interpretable in a structure B if there is an interpretation of
A in B as in model theory, but where the domain of the interpretation is allowed
to be a subset of B<ω, and where all sets in the interpretation are required to be
uniformly r.i. computable, except for the domain which is allowed to be uniformly
r.i.c.e.5
Before giving the formal deﬁnition, we need to review one more concept. A
relation R on A<ω is said to be uniformly r.i.c.e. if there is a c.e. operator W
such that for every copy (B, RB) or (A, R), RB = W D(B). These are exactly the
Σc
1-deﬁnable relations without parameters. We can then extend this deﬁnition and
deﬁne uniformly r.i. computable in the obvious way.
Deﬁnition 5.1. Let A be an L-structure, and B be any structure. Let us assume
that L is a relational language L = {P0, P1, P2, ...} where Pi has arity a(i); so
A = (A; P A
0 , P A
1 , ...) and P A
i
⊆Aa(i).
We say that A is eﬀectively-interpretable in B if, in B, there is
• a uniformly r.i.c.e. set DB
A ⊆B<ω (the domain of the interpretation),
• a uniformly r.i. computable relation η ⊆B<ω × B<ω which is an equivalence
relation on DB
A (interpreting equality),
• a uniformly r.i. computable sequence of relations Ri ⊆(B<ω)a(i), closed under
the equivalence η within DB
A (interpreting the relations Pi),
• and a function f B
A : DB
A →A which induces an isomorphism:
(DB
A/η; R0, R1, ...) ∼= (A; P A
0 , P A
1 , ...).
Let us clarify that: The sets Ri do not need to be subsets of (DB
A)a(i), and,
when we refer to the structure (DB
A/η; R0, R1, ...), we of course mean (DB
A/η; (R0 ∩
(DB
A)a(0))/η, (R1 ∩(DB
A)a(1))/η, ...).
By uniformly r.i. computable sequence we
mean that L
i Ri∈I is uniformly r.i. computable.
If we add parameters, this notion is equivalent to that of Σ-deﬁnability intro-
duced by Ershov [Ers96] and widely studied in Russia. Ershov’s deﬁnition is quite
diﬀerent in format: it uses HF(B) instead of B<ω, and ∃-deﬁnable sets with param-
eters instead of uniformly r.i.c.e. ones. (It is known that r.i.c.e. subsets of B<ω are
5We remark that this deﬁnition is slightly diﬀerent from what the author called eﬀective-
interpretability in [Mon13c, Deﬁnition 1.7], as we now allow the domain to be a subset of B<ω
rather than Bn for some n, and we do not allow parameters in the deﬁnitions.


20
Antonio Montalb´an
equivalent to Σ-deﬁnable (with parameters) subsets of HF(B); see [Mon12, Section
4].) Another well-known notion is that of Σ-equivalence between two structures,
which just means that the structures are Σ-deﬁnable in each other. This is, indeed,
quite a strong notion of equivalence, but the one we consider below is stronger,
as we also require the composition of the isomorphisms to be computable in the
respective structures. Here is the formal deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 5.2. Two structures A and B are eﬀectively-bi-interpretable if there
are eﬀective-interpretations of each structure in the other as in Deﬁnition 5.1 such
that the compositions
f A
B ◦˜f B
A : D(DB
A)
B
→B
and
f B
A ◦˜f A
B : D(DA
B )
A
→A
are uniformly r.i. computable in B and A respectively. (Here ˜f B
A : (DB
A)<ω →A<ω
is the obvious extension of f B
A : DB
A →A.)
In the next lemma, we see how eﬀective-bi-interpretability preserves most com-
putability theoretic properties.
Lemma 5.3. Let A and B be eﬀectively-bi-interpretable.
(1) A and B have the same degree spectrum.
(2) A is computably categorical if and only if B is.
(3) A and B have the same computable dimension.
(4) A is rigid if and only if B is.
(5) A and B have the same Scott rank.
(6) For every ¯a ∈A<ω, there is a ¯b ∈B<ω such that (A, ¯a) and (B,¯b) have the
same computable dimension, and vice-versa.
(7) For every R ⊆A<ω, there is a Q ⊆B<ω which has the same degree spectrum,
and vice-versa.
(8) A has the c.e. extendibility condition if and only if B does.
(9) The index sets of A and B are Turing equivalent, assuming A and B are
inﬁnite structures.
(10) The jumps of A and B are eﬀectively-bi-interpretable.
(Of course, items (2)-(10) assume A and B are computable.)
Sketch of the proof. Throughout this proof, assume that A is the presentation that
is coded inside B<ω, i.e. with domain DB
A, and ˜B is the copy of B coded inside
A<ω, i.e. with domain DA
B = DDB
A
B . We let f be the isomorphism from ˜B to B.
For part (1), just observe that via the Σ-interpretation, given a copy of B, we
can enumerate a copy of A, and hence compute one.
For part (2), we need the following observation: Let B1 and B2 be copies
of B, and let A1 and A2 be the presentations of A coded inside B<ω
1
and B<ω
2
respectively. The point we need to make here is that if A1 and A2 are computably
isomorphic, then so are B1 and B2: A computable isomorphism between A1 and A2
induces a computable isomorphism between ˜B1 and ˜B2, which each are computably-
isomorphic to B1 and B2 respectively. Thus, if A is computably categorical, so is


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
21
B. For (3), we have that if B has k non-computably isomorphic copies B1, ..., Bk,
then the respective structures A1, ..., Ak cannot be computably isomorphic either.
So the eﬀective dimension of A is at least that of B, and hence, by symmetry, they
must be equal.
For part (4), suppose B is not rigid. Let h be a nontrivial automorphism of B.
It then induces an automorphism of B<ω, which then induces an automorphism g
of A, which then induces an automorphism h1 of ˜B. Since f is invariant, we have
h ◦f = f ◦h1 and, since h is nontrivial, h1 is not trivial either. It follows that the
automorphism g of A cannot be trivial either.
For part (5), suppose that SR(A) = α, that is, that every automorphism orbit
in A is Σin
α deﬁnable. Take a tuple ¯b ∈B<ω; we will show its orbit is also Σin
α
deﬁnable. Let ¯c ∈˜B<ω ⊆B<ω be such that f(¯c) = ¯b. The orbit of ¯c is Σin
α deﬁnable
inside A, and since A is Σc
1-deﬁnable in B, the orbit of ¯c is also Σin
α deﬁnable in
B. Since f is Σc
1-deﬁnable in B, the orbit of ¯b is also Σin
α deﬁnable. It follows that
SR(B) ≤α, and, by symmetry, that SR(B) = α.
For part (6), think of ¯a as a tuple in (DB
A)<ω ⊆B<ω and call it ¯b. It is not
hard to show that (A, ¯a) and (B,¯b) are eﬀectively-bi-interpretable.
For part (7), think of R as a subset of (DB
A)<ω ⊆B<ω and call it Q. Clearly,
for every copy of B, R and Q have the same degree. Conversely, for each copy of
A, if we look at the copy of B inside and then at the one of A inside it, we get
that R and Q have the same degree too.
For part (8), all we have to notice is that each ∃-type in A is 1-1 reducible to
a Σc
1-type in B, and vice-versa.
For part (9), given an index of a structure that we want to know if it is iso-
morphic to B, we can produce an index for the structure that is then supposed
to be isomorphic to A. If it is not, then we know the original structure was not
isomorphic to B. If it is, we need to check that the bi-interpretability does produce
an isomorphism, which 0′′ can check. One has to notice that all index sets compute
0′′, as their domain must be inﬁnite.
Last, for part (10), it is not hard to interpret the complete r.i.c.e. relations from
one structure into the other by interpreting Σc
1-formulas in one by Σc
1 formulas in
the other.
2
5.2. Reduction via eﬀective-bi-interpretability. As we mentioned
before, uniform r.i.c.e. sets are Σc
1 deﬁnable. So, an eﬀective-bi-interpretation is
given by a list of Σc
1 formulas deﬁning all the relations involved. When we ﬁx these
formulas, we obtain a map from one kind of structure into another (which might
not always deﬁne a bi-interpretation). We can use this to deﬁne a reducibility
between classes:
Deﬁnition 5.4. A class K is reducible to S via eﬀective-bi-interpretability if there
are Σc
1 formulas such that for every A ∈K, there is a B ∈S such that A and B are
eﬀectively-bi-interpretable using those formulas. A class K is on top for eﬀective-
bi-interpretability if for every computable language L, the class of L-structures is
reducible to K via eﬀective-bi-interpretability.
Not much is known about this deﬁnition.
Classes that are Σ-small are not


22
Antonio Montalb´an
on top for eﬀective-bi-interpretability for the same reason they are not HKSS-
complete. Classes that have bounded Scott rank cannot be on top because eﬀective-
bi-interpretability preserves Scott ranks.
Using the interpretations deﬁned by
Hirschfeldt, Khoussainov, Shore and Slinko [HKSS02], we get the following: undi-
rected graphs, partial orderings, and lattices are on top for eﬀective-bi-interpretability;
if we add a ﬁnite set of constants to the languages of integral domains, commu-
tative semigroups, or 2-step nilpotent groups, they become on top for eﬀective-
bi-interpretability too.
A recent result by R. Miller, J. Park, B. Poonen, H.
Schoutens, and A. Shlapentokh [MPP+] shows that ﬁelds are on top for eﬀective-
bi-interpretability.
References
[AK00]
C.J. Ash and J. Knight. Computable Structures and the Hyperarithmetical
Hierarchy. Elsevier Science, 2000.
[AKMS89] Chris Ash, Julia Knight, Mark Manasse, and Theodore Slaman.
Generic
copies of countable structures. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 42(3):195–205, 1989.
[ATF09]
P. E. Alaev, J. J. Thurber, and A. N. Frolov. Computability on linear orders
enriched by predicates. Algebra Logika, 48(5):549–563, 677, 680, 2009.
[Bal06]
V. Baleva. The jump operation for structure degrees. Arch. Math. Logic,
45(3):249–265, 2006.
[Bec]
Howard Becker. Isomorphism of computable structures and Vaught’s conjec-
ture. To appear.
[BK96]
Howard Becker and Alexander S. Kechris. The descriptive set theory of Pol-
ish group actions, volume 232 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note
Series. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1996.
[CCHM06] Wesley Calvert, Douglas Cenzer, Valentina Harizanov, and Andrei Morozov.
Eﬀective categoricity of equivalence structures. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 141(1-
2):61–78, 2006.
[CCKM04] W. Calvert, D. Cummins, J. F. Knight, and S. Miller. Comparison of classes
of ﬁnite structures. Algebra Logika, 43(6):666–701, 759, 2004.
[CG01]
Riccardo Camerlo and Su Gao. The completeness of the isomorphism relation
for countable Boolean algebras. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 353(2):491–518,
2001.
[Chi90]
John Chisholm. Eﬀective model theory vs. recursive model theory. J. Sym-
bolic Logic, 55(3):1168–1191, 1990.
[CHM12]
Samuel Coskey, Joel David Hamkins, and Russell Miller. The hierarchy of
equivalence relations on the natural numbers under computable reducibility.
Computability, 1(1):15–38, 2012.
[DHK+07] Downey, Hirschfeldt, Kach, Lempp, A. Montalb´an, and Mileti. Subspaces of
computable vector spaces. Journal of Algebra, 314(2):888–894, August 2007.
[DJ94]
Rod Downey and Carl G. Jockusch. Every low Boolean algebra is isomorphic
to a recursive one. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 122(3):871–880, 1994.


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
23
[DKL+]
R. Downey, A. Kach, S. Lempp, A.E.M. Lewis-Pye, A. Montalb´an, and
D. Turetsky. The complexity of computable categoricity. Submitted for pub-
lication.
[Ers96]
Yuri L. Ershov. Deﬁnability and computability. Siberian School of Algebra
and Logic. Consultants Bureau, New York, 1996.
[FF09]
Ekaterina B. Fokina and Sy-David Friedman. Equivalence relations on classes
of computable structures. In Mathematical theory and computational prac-
tice, volume 5635 of Lecture Notes in Comput. Sci., pages 198–207. Springer,
Berlin, 2009.
[FFH+12]
E. B. Fokina, S. Friedman, V. Harizanov, J. F. Knight, C. McCoy, and
A. Montalb´an. Isomorphism and bi-embeddability relations on computable
structures. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 77(1):122–132, 2012.
[Fro10]
A. N. Frolov. Linear orderings of low degree. Sibirsk. Mat. Zh., 51(5):1147–
1162, 2010.
[Fro12]
Andrey N. Frolov. Low linear orderings. J. Logic Comput., 22(4):745–754,
2012.
[FS89]
Harvey Friedman and Lee Stanley. A Borel reducibility theory for classes of
countable structures. J. Symbolic Logic, 54(3):894–914, 1989.
[FZ80]
J¨org Flum and Martin Ziegler. Topological model theory, volume 769 of Lec-
ture Notes in Mathematics. Springer, Berlin, 1980.
[Gao01]
Su Gao. Some dichotomy theorems for isomorphism relations of countable
models. J. Symbolic Logic, 66(2):902–922, 2001.
[GD80]
S. S. Gonˇcarov and V. D. Dzgoev. Autostability of models. Algebra i Logika,
19(1):45–58, 132, 1980.
[GN02]
S. S. Goncharov and Dzh. Na˘ıt.
Computable structure and antistructure
theorems. Algebra Logika, 41(6):639–681, 757, 2002.
[Gon77]
S. S. Gonˇcarov. The number of nonautoequivalent constructivizations. Alge-
bra i Logika, 16(3):257–282, 377, 1977.
[Gon80]
Sergey S. Goncharov. Autostability of models and abelian groups. Algebra i
Logika, 19(1):23–44, 132, 1980.
[Hjo02]
Greg Hjorth.
The isomorphism relation on countable torsion free abelian
groups. Fund. Math., 175(3):241–257, 2002.
[HKSS02]
Denis R. Hirschfeldt,
Bakhadyr Khoussainov,
Richard A. Shore,
and
Arkadii M. Slinko. Degree spectra and computable dimensions in algebraic
structures. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 115(1-3):71–113, 2002.
[HM12]
Kenneth Harris and Antonio Montalb´an. On the n-back-and-forth types of
Boolean algebras. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 364(2):827–866, 2012.
[JS91]
Carl G. Jockusch, Jr. and Robert I. Soare.
Degrees of orderings not iso-
morphic to recursive linear orderings. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 52(1-2):39–64,
1991. International Symposium on Mathematical Logic and its Applications
(Nagoya, 1988).
[JS94]
Carl G. Jockusch, Jr. and Robert I. Soare. Boolean algebras, Stone spaces,
and the iterated Turing jump. J. Symbolic Logic, 59(4):1121–1138, 1994.


24
Antonio Montalb´an
[Khi04]
A. N. Khisamiev. On the Ershov upper semilattice LE. Sibirsk. Mat. Zh.,
45(1):211–228, 2004.
[KM11]
A. Kach and A. Montalb´an. Cuts of linear orders. Order, 28(3):593–600,
2011.
[KMVB07] Julia F. Knight, Sara Miller, and M. Vanden Boom.
Turing computable
embeddings. J. Symbolic Logic, 72(3):901–918, 2007.
[Kru60]
J. B. Kruskal. Well-quasi-ordering, the Tree Theorem, and Vazsonyi’s con-
jecture. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 95:210–225, 1960.
[KS00]
Julia F. Knight and Michael Stob. Computable Boolean algebras. J. Symbolic
Logic, 65(4):1605–1623, 2000.
[LE65]
E. G. K. Lopez-Escobar.
An interpolation theorem for denumerably long
formulas. Fund. Math., 57:253–272, 1965.
[LMMS05] Steﬀen Lempp, Charles McCoy, Russell Miller, and Reed Solomon. Com-
putable categoricity of trees of ﬁnite height. J. Symbolic Logic, 70(1):151–215,
2005.
[LR78]
Peter E. La Roche. Contributions to Recursive Algebra. ProQuest LLC, Ann
Arbor, MI, 1978. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Cornell University.
[Mar90]
David Marker. Bounds on Scott rank for various nonelementary classes. Arch.
Math. Logic, 30(2):73–82, 1990.
[Mona]
Antonio
Montalb´an.
Analytic
equivalence
relations
satisfying
hyperarithmetic-is-recursive. Submitted for publication.
[Monb]
Antonio Montalb´an. Classes of structures with no intermediate isomorphism
problems. Submitted for publication.
[Monc]
Antonio Montalb´an. A robuster Scott rank. Submitted for publication.
[Mon09]
Antonio Montalb´an. Notes on the jump of a structure. Mathematical Theory
and Computational Practice, pages 372–378, 2009.
[Mon10a]
Antonio Montalb´an. Coding and deﬁnability in computable structures. Notes
from a course at Notre Dame University to be published in the NDJFL, 2010.
[Mon10b]
Antonio Montalb´an. Counting the back-and-forth types. Journal of Logic
and Computability, page doi: 10.1093/logcom/exq048, 2010.
[Mon12]
Antonio Montalb´an. Rice sequences of relations. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society A, 370:3464–3487, 2012.
[Mon13a]
Antonio Montalb´an. A computability theoretic equivalent to Vaught’s con-
jecture. Adv. Math., 235:56–73, 2013.
[Mon13b]
Antonio Montalb´an.
Copyable structures.
Journal of Symbolic Logic,
78(4):1025–1346, 2013.
[Mon13c]
Antonio Montalb´an. A ﬁxed point for the jump operator on structures. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, 78(2):425–438, 2013.
[Mor70]
Michael Morley. The number of countable models. J. Symbolic Logic, 35:14–
18, 1970.
[Mos80]
Yiannis N. Moschovakis.
Descriptive set theory, volume 100 of Studies in
Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. North-Holland Publishing Co.,
Amsterdam, 1980.


Computability theoretic classiﬁcations for classes of structures
25
[MPP+]
R. Miller, J. Park, B. Poonen, H. Schoutens, and A. Shlapentokh. Fields are
complete for isomorphisms. To appear.
[Nur74]
A. T. Nurtazin. Computable classes and algebraic criteria for autostability.
PhD thesis, Institute of Mathematics and Mechanics, Alma-Ata, 1974.
[Ric77]
Linda Richter. Degrees of unsolvability of models. PhD thesis, University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1977.
[Ric81]
Linda Jean Richter. Degrees of structures. J. Symbolic Logic, 46(4):723–731,
1981.
[Sac07]
Gerald E. Sacks. Bounds on weak scattering. Notre Dame J. Formal Logic,
48(1):5–31, 2007.
[Smi81]
Rick L. Smith. Two theorems on autostability in p-groups. In Logic Year
1979–80 (Proc. Seminars and Conf. Math. Logic, Univ. Connecticut, Storrs,
Conn., 1979/80), volume 859 of Lecture Notes in Math., pages 302–311.
Springer, Berlin, 1981.
[Thu95]
John J. Thurber. Every low2 Boolean algebra has a recursive copy. Proc.
Amer. Math. Soc., 123(12):3859–3866, 1995.
[Vau61]
R. L. Vaught. Denumerable models of complete theories. In Inﬁnitistic Meth-
ods (Proc. Sympos. Foundations of Math., Warsaw, 1959), pages 303–321.
Pergamon, Oxford, 1961.
[VB07]
M. Vanden Boom. The eﬀective Borel hierarchy. Fund. Math., 195(3):269–
289, 2007.
Department of Mathematics, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
E-mail: antonio@math.berkeley.edu
