arXiv:1211.1057v3  [math.DG]  29 May 2013
CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
LARRY GUTH
Abstract. We construct homotopically non-trivial maps from Sm to Sm−1 with arbitrarily
small k-dilation for each k > (m + 1)/2. We prove that homotopically non-trivial maps from Sm
to Sm−1 cannot have arbitrarily small k-dilation for k ≤(m + 1)/2.
1. Introduction
The k-dilation of a map between Riemannian manifolds measures how much the map stretches
k-dimensional volumes. If F is a C1 map, we say that Dilk(F) ≤λ if each k-dimensional surface Σ
in the domain is mapped to an image with k-dimensional volume at most λ Volk(Σ). The 1-dilation
is the same as the Lipschitz constant.
We will study how the k-dilation of F is related to its
homotopy class. The k-dilation describes the local geometry of F, and we want to understand how
the local geometry of F inﬂuences its global topological features. We focus on maps from the unit
m-sphere to the unit n-sphere.
We begin with the following question: if a map F : Sm →Sn has small k-dilation, does the
map F have to be contractible? If a map F : Sm →Sn has Dil1 F < 1, then it is contractible. If
Dil1 F < 1, then the diameter of the image of F is < π, and so F is not surjective. In [TW] Tsui
and Wang proved that maps with small 2-dilation are also contractible.
Tsui-Wang inequality. If F : Sm →Sn has Dil2 F < 1, (and if m, n ≥2), then F is contractible.
In contrast, we will show that maps with small 3-dilation may not be contractible.
Example. There is a sequence of homotopically non-trivial maps Fj : S4 →S3 with Dil3(Fj) →0.
Our goal is to study this phenomenon. We study the following question.
Main Question. Suppose that Fj : Sm →Sn is a sequence of maps, all in the same homotopy
class, with Dilk(Fj) →0. What can we conclude about the homotopy class of the Fj?
Our main result describes the situation for maps from Sm to Sm−1.
Main Theorem. Fix an integer m ≥3. If k > (m+1)/2, then there is a sequence of homotopically
non-trivial maps Fj from Sm to Sm−1 with k-dilation tending to zero. On the other hand if k ≤
(m + 1)/2, then every homotopically non-trivial map from Sm to Sm−1 has k-dilation at least
c(m) > 0.
In the ﬁrst half of our theorem, we have to construct some homotopically non-trivial maps with
tiny k-dilations. Our construction gives the following more general result.
An h-principle for k-dilation. Suppose that F0 is a map from Sm to Sn with m > n and
k > (m + 1)/2. Then for any ǫ > 0, we can homotope F0 to a map F with k-dilation less than ǫ.
1


2
LARRY GUTH
For a given map F, the k-dilations are related to each other by the inequalities Dil1(F) ≥
Dil2(F)1/2 ≥Dil3(F)1/3 ≥... So Dil1(F) ≤1 implies Dil2(F) ≤1 etc.
As k increases, maps
with small k-dilation become easier to ﬁnd. Our results show that there is a phase transition at
k = (m + 1)/2. When k > (m + 1)/2, the condition Dilk F ≤1 behaves rather ﬂexibly. When
k ≤(m + 1)/2 the condition behaves more rigidly.
We recall some previous results about k-dilation and homotopy type of maps. We start with
results about the 1-dilation, which is much better understood. In the paper “Homotopical eﬀects
of dilatation” ([GHED]), Gromov investigated the relationship between the 1-dilation of a map and
its homotopy type. If F is a map from Sm to Sm, then its degree is at most Dil1(F)m, and this
bound is sharp up to a constant factor. A more diﬃcult result from [GHED] says that if F is a
map from S2n−1 to Sn (with n even), then its Hopf invariant is at most Cn Dil1(F)2n, and this
upper bound is also sharp up to a constant factor. Recently, DeTurck, Gluck, and Storm [DGS]
proved that each Hopf ﬁbration has the minimal 1-dilation in its homotopy class. The 1-dilations
of maps in torsion homotopy classes have not been studied as much, partly because it’s diﬃcult to
formulate a good question. For each torsion homotopy class in πm(Sn), the minimal 1-dilation is
ﬁnite and ≥1. There is no good candidate for a minimizer, and so ﬁnding the exact minimal value
of the 1-dilation looks hopeless.
In [GCC], Gromov posed the question how the k-dilation of a map F : Sm →Sn is related to
its homotopy class. The estimates above about the degree and the Hopf invariant generalize to
k-dilation. The argument about the degree generalizes to show that a map F : Sm →Sm has
degree at most Dilm(F). The argument about the Hopf invariant gives the following inequality.
(See [GCC] section 3.6 and [GMS] pages 358-59.)
Hopf invariant inequality. (Gromov) Suppose that F : S2n−1 →Sn, with n even. Then the
Hopf invariant of F is controlled by the n-dilation of F as follows:
| Hopf(F)| ≤C(n) Diln(F)2.
In particular, if Hopf(F) ̸= 0, then Diln(F) ≥c(n) > 0.
The proof of the Hopf invariant inequality is based on diﬀerential forms. On the one hand,
the Hopf invariant can be written in terms of diﬀerential forms. On the other hand, diﬀerential
forms interact nicely with k-dilation. If α is a k-form, then ∥F ∗α∥∞≤Dilk(F)∥α∥∞. This allows
us to bound homotopy invariants deﬁned using diﬀerential forms in terms of k-dilation. It seems
signiﬁcantly harder to connect the k-dilation with torsion homotopy invariants.
In the second half of the main theorem, we prove a lower bound for the k-dilation of maps in
some torsion homotopy classes. Our proof involves Steenrod squares, and the technique gives the
following slightly more general estimate.
Steenrod squares and k-dilation. Let F be a map from Sm to Sn, and let X be the cell complex
formed by attaching an (m+1)-cell to Sn using F: X = Bm+1 ∪F Sn. If the complex X has a
non-trivial Steenrod square and if k ≤(m + 1)/2, then Dilk(F) ≥c(m) > 0.
The non-trivial homotopy class in πm(Sm−1) induces a non-trivial Steenrod square. There are
also homotopy classes inducing a non-trivial Steenrod square in πm(Sm−3) and πm(Sm−7) if m is
suﬃciently large.
We will also see that diﬀerent homotopy classes in the same group πm(Sn) can interact with
k-dilation diﬀerently.
Bechtluft-Sachs observed a related phenomenon in [BS].
Building on his
observation, we will construct maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation (for some k) in homotopy
classes that are suspensions. For example, we will prove the following result.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
3
Proposition 1.1. Suppose that a ∈πm(Sn) is the suspension of a homotopy class in πm−1(Sn−1),
and that m > n. Then the class a can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small n-dilation.
We will apply this method to some speciﬁc homotopy groups. We begin with the group π7(S4)
which is isomorphic to Z ⊕Z12.
Proposition 1.2. Each torsion element a ∈π7(S4) can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small
4-dilation, and each non-torsion element cannot.
The non-torsion classes have non-zero Hopf invariant, and their 4-dilation cannot be too small by
the Hopf invariant inequality. The non-torsion elements are all suspensions, and using the suspen-
sion structure, their 4-dilations can be made arbitrarily small. In other homotopy groups, diﬀerent
torsion elements may behave diﬀerently. For example, we consider π8(S5) which is isomorphic to
Z24.
Proposition 1.3. The homotopy class corresponding to 12 in Z24 = π8(S5) can be realized by
maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation.
The homotopy classes corresponding to odd numbers in
Z24 = π8(S5) cannot be realized with arbitrarily small 4-dilation.
The odd classes involve non-trivial Steenrod squares, and so the second statement follows from
the Steenrod square inequality. The class 12 is a suspension from π5(S2), and using the suspension
structure we are able to construct maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation.
1.1. Thick tubes. The results and questions we mentioned above have some connections with the
geometry of tubes in Rm. We mention these in the introduction because they may be easier to
visualize than the main theorem. In particular, instead of talking about a non-trivial Steenrod
square, we can talk about a tube with a twist in it.
An m-dimensional tube is an embedding I from S1 × Bm−1 into Rm. We write S1(δ) for the
circle of radius δ and Bm−1(R) for the ball of radius R. We say an embedding is k-expanding if
it increases the k-dimensional area of each k-dimensional surface. Finally, we say that a tube has
k-thickness R if the embedding I is a k-expanding embedding from S1(δ) × Bm−1(R) into Rm, for
some δ > 0.
Surprisingly, there are 3-dimensional tubes with 2-thickness 1 inside of arbitrarily small balls
B3(ǫ).
Thick tube example. For every ǫ > 0, there is a 3-dimensional tube with 2-thickness 1 embedded
in the ǫ-ball B3(ǫ) ⊂R3.
The ﬁrst example of this type that I’m aware of was given by Zel’dovitch in the 1970’s (see [Ar]).
The example generalizes in a straightforward way to higher dimensions.
Thick tube example. (Higher dimensions) In dimension m, if k ≥(m + 1)/2, then a tube with
k-thickness 1 may be embedded into an arbitrarily small ball.
In [Ge] Gehring studied the geometry of linked tubes in R3. Gehring was interested in a geometric
invariant called the conformal modulus of a tube. His methods give the following result about thick
tubes.
Gehring linking inequality. If I1 and I2 are disjoint 3-dimensional tubes with 2-thickness 1
contained in the ball B3(ǫ), and if ǫ > 0 is suﬃciently small, then the tubes have linking number
zero.


4
LARRY GUTH
In the early 1990’s, Freedman and He [FH] extended Gehring’s work, proving estimates for
general knots and links. For example, they proved that a 3-dimensional tube with 2-thickness 1
contained in a small ball must be unknotted.
An embedding I : S1 × Bm−1 →Rm deﬁnes a framing of the normal bundle of the core circle
I(S1 × {0}). Any embedded circle in Rm also has a canonical framing of its normal bundle (up to
homotopy), induced by the ambient space. The relationship between the two framings deﬁnes an
element in π1(SO(m−1)) which is Z for m = 3 and Z2 for m > 3. We call this element the twisting
number of the embedding I. If m = 3, then the twisting number of I is equal to the linking number
of the circles I(S1 × {p}) and I(S1 × {q}) for any p, q ∈B2. Therefore, the linking inequality above
has the following corollary.
Twisting inequality in three dimensions. If I is a 3-dimensional tube with 2-thickness 1
contained in the ball B3(ǫ), and if ǫ is suﬃciently small, then the twisting number of I is equal to
zero.
In summary, it’s possible to embed a thick tube into a tiny ball, but we cannot put a twist in
it. In higher dimensions, m > 3, there is no linking number of tubes and every tube is unknotted,
but the twisting number is still deﬁned modulo 2. We will prove the following higher-dimensional
generalization of Gehring’s twisting inequality.
Twisting inequality in high dimensions. If I is an m-dimensional tube, with k-thickness 1,
contained in the ball Bm(ǫ), if ǫ > 0 is suﬃciently small, and if k ≤(m + 1)/2, then the tube I has
twisting number zero.
In particular, if m is any odd dimension m ≥5, and if k = (m + 1)/2, then we can embed a
k-thick tube into an arbitrarily small ball, but we cannot put a twist in it.
The twisting inequality in three dimensions is closely related to the inequality | Hopf(F)| ≲
Dil2(F)2 for maps F : S3 →S2. The twisting inequality in higher dimensions is closely related to
the Steenrod square inequality and the main theorem of the paper.
1.2. On the proof of the lower bound for k-dilation using Steenrod squares. The main
new idea in this paper is a way to prove a lower bound for the k-dilation of maps in certain torsion
homotopy classes. Here is an outline of the argument.
As a warmup, we consider maps S3 →S2 with non-zero Hopf invariant. The Hopf invariant
inequality implies that maps with tiny 2-dilation must have zero Hopf invariant. The original proof
uses diﬀerential forms, but this proof is hard to generalize to maps Sm →Sm−1 with m ≥4,
because the relevant homotopy invariant cannot be written in terms of diﬀerential forms.
We describe an alternate proof that a map F : S3 →S2 with tiny 2-dilation has zero Hopf
invariant. The Hopf invariant is closely related to cup products which are closely related to Cartesian
products. We consider the Cartesian product F × F : S3 × S3 →S2 × S2. We can read the Hopf
invariant from F × F as follows. There is a 4-chain Z0 in S3 × S3 with the interesting property
that F × F(Z0) is always a cycle. To see how this may happen, notice that F × F maps Diag(S3)
to Diag(S2). The diagonal Diag(S3) is one of the components of ∂Z0 and F × F collapses it to
something 2-dimensional. The same happens to the other components of ∂Z0, and so F × F seals
the boundary closed making a cycle. We let Z(F) denote the cycle F × F(Z0). The homology class
of Z(F) is the Hopf invariant of F. Now it is easy to check that if Dil2(F) is tiny, then Dil4(F × F)
is also tiny, and so the cycle Z(F) has tiny 4-volume, and so it is homologically trivial in S2 × S2.
This approach generalizes to maps Sm →Sm−1, or more generally to maps Sm →Sn when the
cell complex has a non-trivial Steenrod square. The Steenrod squares are closely connected with


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
5
the following twisted product. For any space X, consider the product Si × X × X, and consider
the involution I(θ, x1, x2) = (−θ, x2, x1). The involution acts freely, and the quotient is denoted
ΓiX. The space ΓiX is a ﬁber bundle with ﬁber X × X and base RPi. The construction is also
functorial, and so our map F : Sm →Sn induces a map ΓiF : ΓiSm →ΓiSn. (Eventually we will
choose i = 2n −m −1.) As above, there is a 2n-chain Z0 in ΓiSm with the interesting property
that ΓiF(Z0) is always a cycle in ΓiSn. The 2n-cycle Z(F) = ΓiF(Z0) is homologically non-trivial
if and only if the cell complex Bm+1 ∪F Sn has a non-trivial Steenrod square.
We suppose k ≤(m+ 1)/2 and that Dilk(F) is tiny. The k-dilation of F gives information about
the geometry of the map ΓiF. For some small values of k, Dil2n ΓiF can be controlled in terms
of Dilk F. For example, if F : Sm →Sm−1 has suﬃciently small 2-dilation, then the volume of
Z(F) is small, so Z(F) is null-homologous, and so Bm+1 ∪F Sn has trivial Steenrod squares. The
same argument works if F : Sm →Sm−3 has suﬃciently small 4-dilation. However, for most values
of k in the range k ≤(m + 1)/2, Dilk F does not control Dil2n ΓiF. The k-dilation of F may be
arbitrarily small and yet Dil2n ΓiF and Vol Z(F) may be arbitrarily large.
The construction of ΓiF does not treat all the directions equally. The double cover of ΓiF is
deﬁned to be id × F × F : Si × Sm × Sm →Si × Sn × Sn, where id is the identity map. We can see
that the diﬀerent factors are not treated in the same way. Because the situation is not isotropic,
we can make a more reﬁned estimate that treats diﬀerent directions diﬀerently. If k ≤(m + 1)/2
and Dilk(F) is tiny, then the tangent plane of Z(F) is usually constrained to lie in certain ‘good’
directions. We will divide Z(F) into a good set, where its tangent plane is constrained to lie in
‘good’ directions, and a bad set of small volume where the tangent plane may go in any direction.
It takes a little time to say in detail what are the ‘good’ directions. To give some sense, we
mention that on the good set, the tangent plane of Z(F) must be nearly orthogonal to the Sn × Sn
direction. If we look at the double cover of Z(F) in Si×Sn×Sn and project it to the Sn×Sn factor,
the volume of the projection is tiny. This implies that the double cover of Z(F) is homologically
trivial. But it may happen that the double cover of a cycle is homologically trivial and the cycle is
not.
As a warmup, we ﬁrst consider the case of a cycle X in ΓiSn whose tangent plane lies in the
good directions at every point. This condition forces every loop in X to be homotopically trivial
in ΓiSn. This is the key fact about the good directions for tangent planes. Therefore, the double
cover of X consists of two disjoint cycles X1 and X2 in Si × Sn × Sn. Because of the control on
the tangent direction of X, each of these cycles is trivial, and so X is homologically trivial.
But the proof of our theorem is more complicated because the cycle Z(F) has a bad set of small
volume where the tangent plane may face in any direction. As a result, the cycle Z(F) may contain
non-trivial loops - we only know that each non-trivial loop must go through this small bad set. The
double cover of Z(F) consists of two large pieces connected by a small bridge - the bridge being
the double cover of the bad set. We will cut out the small bridge and replace it by two small caps.
After this surgery, we get two homologically trivial cycles in Si × Sn × Sn. Projecting one of them
down to ΓiSn, we get a trivial cycle which is very close to Z(F). It consists of Z(F) minus the bad
set and plus the image of the cap. As long as the cap is small, it follows that Z(F) is homologically
trivial.
1.3. On the proof of the h-principle. We will give two constructions of maps with small k-
dilation. The ﬁrst construction uses suspensions. The construction is short, and we give it early in
the paper. The second construction is used to prove the h-principle for k-dilation. That construction
is longer, and we describe the main idea here.


6
LARRY GUTH
The following simple observation is helpful to construct maps with small k-dilation. If a map
sends a region of the domain into a (k −1)-dimensional polyhedron, then on that region the map
has k-dilation zero. With this observation in mind, we sketch the construction in the h-principle.
We begin with a map F0 : Sm →Sn. We consider a ﬁne triangulation of the target Sn. We deﬁne
U ⊂Sm so that F0 maps the complement of U into the (k −1)-skeleton of the ﬁne triangulation.
We know that F0 automatically has (k −1)-dilation zero on U c, and we only have to worry about
U. Of course the k-dilation of F0 on U is probably not tiny, and we have to modify F0.
We will carefully construct a degree 1 map G : Sm →Sm, and the map F will be F0 ◦G. Since G
is homotopic to the identity, F will be homotopic to F0. We let T be G−1(U). The map G sends T
to U and T c to U c. Therefore, the map F sends T c into the (k−1)-skeleton of the ﬁne triangulation.
By our simple observation, the k-dilation of F on T c is automatically zero. In our construction,
the restriction of F to T c will be very complicated and may have a huge (k −1)-dilation, but we
don’t have to keep track of it. We only have to worry about the k-dilation of F on T . In fact, we
will be able to arrange that the Lipschitz constant of F on T is very small.
Telling a minor white lie, the set U is a ﬁber bundle, where the base space is Sn minus the
(k −1)-skeleton of our triangulation, and each ﬁber is a manifold of dimension m −n > 0. We call
directions tangent to the ﬁber ‘vertical’, and the perpendicular directions horizontal. The map G
will be a diﬀeomorphism from T to U, so T also has this ﬁber bundle structure. The map G will
strongly shrink all the horizontal directions and strongly stretch all the vertical directions. Since F0
annihilates all the vertical directions, the composition G ◦F0 will have a small Lipschitz constant.
It’s actually easier to imagine G−1 going from U to T than to imagine G. We take a second
to switch our perspective. We want an embedding G−1 from U into Sm which stretches all the
horizontal directions and shrinks all the vertical directions. We build this embedding by isotoping
the identity map.
To get a sense of how to do the isotopy, we need to describe U a little bit more. The complement of
the (k−1)-skeleton of our triangulation of Sn is a small neighborhood of the dual n−k-dimensional
polyhedron. Now U is a small neighborhood of the inverse image of this polyhedron, so U is a small
neighborhood of a polyhedron of dimension p = m −k. The condition k > (m + 1)/2 is equivalent
to p < (m −1)/2.
If p < (m −1)/2, then any p-dimensional polyhedron embeds in Sm, and any two embeddings
are isotopic. These facts follow from a standard general position argument. Informally, we may say
that a p-dimensional polyhedron in Sm may be isotoped rather freely – there is no obstruction to
isotoping it into any position that we like. This intuition extends to our set U, which is a small
neighborhood of a polyhedron of dimension p < (m −1)/2. We isotope U so that the horizontal
directions all expand and the vertical directions all contract. Because of the condition p < (m−1)/2,
there is no obstruction that prevents us from isotoping U in this way. The ﬁbers have to shrink,
but everything can slide out of their way to allow them to shrink. As they shrink, it creates space
which allows the horizontal directions to become thicker.
To make this argument precise and rigorous, we use the h-principle for immersions and general
position arguments.
The h-principle for immersions allows us to build immersions of U rather
freely. Using the condition p < (m −1)/2, we can modify these immersions to embeddings. This
last argument is a quantitative version of the general position argument mentioned in the last
paragraph.
1.4. Outline of the paper. Now we give an outline of the paper. We describe what material
appears in each section, and also what kinds of tools and background each section uses.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
7
In Section 2, we give background about k-dilation. This section contains all the facts about
k-dilation that we need in the paper.
In Section 3, we construct homotopically non-trivial maps with small k-dilation using suspen-
sions. With this method, we can construct the maps in the main theorem for m ≤7, and we can
give some other examples in classes that are suspensions.
The next large chunk of the paper is concerned with proving the lower bound for k-dilation for
homotopy classes that induce a non-trivial Steenrod square. This argument follows the outline in
Section 1.2. The argument involves a combination of topology and isoperimetric-type estimates.
On the topology side, we need to use some facts about Steenrod squares. On the geometry side,
we need to use the Federer-Fleming deformation theorem in many places. We will also introduce
some small variations on the deformation theorem. Here is a more detailed outline. In Section
4, we prove the Hopf invariant inequality using the cycle Z(F) as described above. In Section 5,
we generalize this setup with the cycle Z(F) to all homotopy classes with a non-trivial Steenrod
square. This section requires some background on Steenrod squares. The material we need is in
Section 4L of Hatcher’s book Algebraic Topology, [H]. In Section 6, we describe how the geometry
of ΓiF is controlled by Dilk F. We deﬁne and describe ‘directed volumes’ of Z(F), and describe
the good and bad directions. We see that the volume of Z(F) in bad directions is controlled by
Dilk F. In Section 7, we discuss the surgery where the bad part of the double cover of Z(F) is cut
out and replaced by small caps. We see that the estimates that we need about the size of the caps
follow from an inequality about chains in Euclidean space called the perpendicular pair inequality.
The perpendicular pair inequality is a geometric inequality in the same area as the Federer-Fleming
isoperimetric inequality (the isoperimetric inequality for cycles of arbitrary codimension). In Section
8, we prove the perpendicular pair inequality. This section heavily uses the deformation theorem.
There is a review of the deformation theorem in an appendix at the end of the paper.
In Section 9, we discuss thick tubes and prove the estimates about twisted tubes in Section 1.1.
In Sections 10-11, we prove the h-principle for k-dilation. As a special case, this gives all the
maps in the main theorem. This argument follows the outline in Section 1.3. In Section 10, we
prove a quantitative embedding result using a general position argument. This result allows us to
isotope the set U rather freely, as described above. Section 10 uses the h-principle for immersions.
The material we need is in the book Introduction to the H-Principle by Eliashberg and Mishachev,
[EM]. In Section 11, we prove the h-principle for k-dilation.
This ﬁnishes the proofs of all the results in the paper. Section 12 gives more background about
k-dilation.
It discusses other results in the literature that are generally relevant to the paper.
Section 13 discusses open problems. Section 14 contains several appendices.
Acknowledgements. I would like to thank Tom Mrowka, Brian White, Misha Gromov, and
Robert Young for helpful conversations related to the paper.
2. Basic facts about k-dilation
In this section, we recall the deﬁnition of k-dilation, some diﬀerent ways of looking at it, and
some of its immediate consequences. We hope to give some feel for the condition Dilk F ≤λ.
Readers who are already familiar with k-dilation can skip this section.
If F is a C1 map from (M m, g) to (N n, h), then we say that F has k-dilation ≤λ if, for each
k-dimensional submanifold Σk ⊂M,
Volk(F(Σ)) ≤λ Volk(Σ).


8
LARRY GUTH
The k-dilation of F can be described in terms of the derivative dF. Suppose that y = F(x), and
we consider the derivative dFx : TxM →TyN. We consider the singular values of the derivative
dFx. The singular value decomposition says that we can ﬁnd an orthonormal frame v1, ..., vm for
TxM and an orthonormal frame w1, ..., wn for TyN so that dFx(vj) = sjwj. Here sj ≥0 are the
singular values of dFx. (If m > n, then sj = 0 for all j > n.) We organize the singular values
so that s1 ≥s2 ≥s3 ≥.... The map dFx maps the unit ball in TxM to an ellipsoid in TyN with
principal radii s1 ≥s2 ≥.... The norm of dFx is s1, and the norms of the exterior products ΛkdFx
are also described by the singular values as follows.
Proposition 2.1. If dFx has singular values s1 ≥s2 ≥..., then the norm of ΛkdFx is Qk
i=1 si.
Proof. Recall that vi are an orthonormal basis of TxM and wi an orthonormal basis of TyN with
dFxvi = siwi. There is an orthonormal basis of ΛkTxM given by the wedge products vi1 ∧... ∧vik,
with i1 < ... < ik. We compute ΛkdFx in this basis.
ΛkdFx(vi1 ∧... ∧vik) = si1...sikwi1 ∧... ∧wik.
Since {wi1 ∧... ∧wik} is an orthonormal basis of ΛkTyN, we see that the singular values of
ΛkdFx are just the products si1...sik with i1 < ... < ik. In particular, we see that the operator
norm |ΛkdFx| = s1...sk.
□
Now we can write the k-dilation in terms of ΛkdF and/or the singular values of the derivative.
Proposition 2.2. If F : (M, g) →(N, h) is a C1 map, then the k-dilation of F is equal to
supx∈M |ΛkdFx|. If s1(x) ≥s2(x) ≥... are the singular values of dFx, then the k-dilation of F is
also equal to supx∈M s1(x)...sk(x).
Proof. Fix x ∈M, and suppose as above that dFxvi = siwi.
If Σ is a small k-dimensional
disk centered at x with tangent plane spanned by v1, ..., vk, then Volk F(Σ) is approximately
(Qk
j=1 sj) Volk(Σ). Therefore, Dilk(F) ≥Qk
j=1 sj.
If Σ is an oriented k-dimensional manifold, then at each point x ∈Σ, the tangent space of Σ
deﬁnes a unit k-vector VΣ(x) ∈ΛkTxM. (Any k-dimensional manifold can be written as a union of
oriented manifolds, so we can restrict attention to the case of oriented manifolds Σ.) The volume
of F(Σ) can then be described as
Volk F(Σ) =
Z
Σ
|ΛkdFxVΣ(x)|dvol(x) ≤sup
x |ΛkdFx| Volk Σ.
Therefore, Dilk F ≤supx∈M |ΛkdFx| = supx∈M
Qk
j=1 sj(x).
□
With these results, we can give a little discussion of the condition Dilk F ≤1. A map with
small 2-dilation can have an arbitrarily large value of s1(x) as long as s2(x) is small enough to
make s1s2 ≤1. So the derivative dFx can stretch in one direction arbitrarily strongly as long as it
contracts in the perpendicular directions enough to compensate. Similarly, if Dilk F ≤1, then the
derivative dFx can stretch in (k-1) directions arbitrarily strongly, as long as it contracts in all the
perpendicular directions enough to compensate. Also, dFx may behave diﬀerently for diﬀerent x.
For example, if Dilk(F) ≤1, there may be some x where dFx is roughly an isometry and other x
where dFx stretches a lot in one direction and contracts in the others. The condition Dilk(F) ≤1
gives local information about dFx for each x, and it’s not easy to understand what kinds of global
behavior are allowed by this condition. To help get a feel for this, consider the following example.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
9
Proposition 2.3. There are surjective maps from the unit 3-ball to the unit 2-ball with arbitrarily
small 2-dilation.
Proof. (sketch) Fix ǫ > 0. We want to ﬁnd a surjective map from B3 to B2 with 2-dilation ≤ǫ.
It’s easy to ﬁnd a (linear) map with 2-dilation ≤ǫ onto B2(ǫ1/2). By modifying this map a little,
we can make a map F0 with 2-dilation ≤ǫ onto B2(ǫ1/2/10) and which maps ∂B3 to a point.
We can improve the situation as follows. Let r be a small radius which we choose later. Take r−3
disjoint r-balls in the unit 3-ball. Using a rescaling of the map F0, we can deﬁne F on each r-ball
so that its image covers a disk of radius r′ = (1/10)ǫ1/2r, and so that F collapses the boundary of
each r-ball to a point. The image of F now includes r−3 discs in B2 of radius r′ ∼ǫ1/2r. Taking r
suﬃciently small compared to ǫ, we can cover all of B2 with these disks.
So far, we have only deﬁned F on the union of the disjoint balls of radius r. Now we have to
extend F to the region between them in a way that matches with F on the boundary. At this point,
it’s helpful to know that F mapped the boundary of each ball to a point. We choose a 1-dimensional
tree in B2 that includes all of these points, and we extend F to a map from the complement of the
balls to the tree. Since the tree is contractible, such an extension exists. And since the image is
1-dimensional, the 2-dilation of the extension is zero (on the complement of the balls).
□
Let’s make some comments on this construction. Notice that the singular values of dFx behave
diﬀerently at diﬀerent points. At the points inside the balls, we have singular values s1 ∼s2 ∼ǫ1/2.
At the points between the balls, we have singular value s1 very large and s2 = 0. The key to the
construction is to mix these two behaviors. For context, a linear map L : B3 →B2 with 2-dilation
ǫ cannot be surjective - the image will have area ≲ǫ. A non-linear map F : B3 →B2 with tiny
2-dilation can be surjective, and one crucial ingredient is that the derivative of the map should be
wildly diﬀerent at diﬀerent places. (This example can also be made stronger. In [K], Kaufman
gives an example of a C1 surjective map from B3 to B2 with 2-dilation equal to zero.)
We’ve just seen that (non-linear) maps with small k-dilation can do things that linear maps
with small k-dilation can’t. There are also some limits to this phenomenon. For example, if F is
a C1 map with Dilk F > 1, then there is no sequence of maps with Dilk Fj ≤1 which converges
to F in C0. In particular, (non-linear) maps with k-dilation ≤1 cannot imitate a linear map with
k-dilation > 1. In Section 12, we prove this result and give some further background on k-dilation.
Using the analysis with singular values, we can see how the k-dilations for diﬀerents values of k
are related to each other.
Proposition 2.4. If k < l, then Dilk(F)1/k ≥Dill(F)1/l.
Proof. For each point x, we have s1(x) ≥s2(x) ≥.... Since k < l, for each point x we have
(
k
Y
j=1
sj(x))1/k ≥(
lY
j=1
sj(x))1/l.
Taking the supremum over x, we get Dilk(F)1/k ≥Dill(F)1/l.
□
So the k-dilations of F for diﬀerent k are related to each other by the following inequalities.
Dil1(F) ≥Dil2(F)1/2 ≥Dil3(F)1/3 ≥...
As k increases, the condition Dilk F ≤1 gets weaker, and ﬁnding a map with small k-dilation gets
easier.


10
LARRY GUTH
We can also see a connection between k-dilation and diﬀerential forms.
Proposition 2.5. If F : (M, g) →(N, h) is a C1 map and α is a k-form on N, then
∥F ∗α∥∞≤Dilk(F)∥α∥∞.
Proof. For any point x ∈M, let y = F(x). Then (F ∗α)x = ΛkdF ∗
x(αy). The map ΛkdF ∗
x is the
adjoint of the map ΛkdFx : ΛkTxM →ΛkTyN. Therefore, the operator norm |ΛkdF ∗
x| is equal to
the operator norm |ΛkdFx| ≤Dilk(F). Hence |(F ∗α)x| ≤Dilk(F)|αy|.
□
Using this proposition, we can easily bound the degree of a map in terms of its k-dilations. Recall
that Sm denotes the unit m-sphere.
Proposition 2.6. The degree of a map F : Sm →Sm obeys the bound | Deg F| ≤Dilm F.
Proof. Let ω be the volume form of Sm. We write | Deg F| = |(Vol Sm)−1 R
Sm F ∗ω| ≤∥F ∗ω∥∞≤
Dilm F.
□
3. Mappings with small k-dilation, the suspension method
In this paper, we will give two diﬀerent constructions of homotopically non-trivial maps with
arbitrarily small k-dilation.
This section contains a construction that is adapted to homotopy
classes that are suspensions. The construction is short, and so we describe it right away.
This construction isn’t strong enough to make all the mappings from the main theorem in the
introduction or from the h-principle for k-dilation stated in the introduction, but it does give many
interesting mappings. It gives homotopically non-trivial maps from S4 to S3 with arbitrarily small
3-dilation. More generally it gives the following proposition.
Proposition 3.1. If m ≥4, and if k > (2/3)m, then there are homotopically non-trivial maps
from Sm to Sm−1 with arbitrarily small k-dilation.
Eventually we will prove that there are homotopically non-trivial maps Sm →Sm−1 with arbi-
trarily small k-dilation for all k > (m + 1)/2, which is the sharp range of k. This proposition gives
the sharp range of k for m = 4, 5, 6, or 7, but not for m ≥8.
Later in the paper, we will prove the h-principle for k-dilation using a diﬀerent construction,
based on general position arguments. This second construction is much longer.
The suspension method can sometimes do better than the general position method we use later.
In particular, the suspension method can allow us to distinguish diﬀerent homotopy classes in the
same group πm(Sn). For example, consider π7(S4). Maps from S7 to S4 with non-trivial Hopf
invariant must have 4-dilation at least c > 0. The homotopy group π7(S4) is isomorphic to Z⊕Z12.
The torsion elements are exactly the elements with Hopf invariant zero. They are all suspensions
of classes in π6(S3).
The suspension method applies to all the torsion elements, and it proves
that all of them can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation. We will discuss a few
more examples below. The information that we use about the homotopy groups of spheres and the
suspension maps between them may be found in [T], pages 39-42.
Now we give the construction of maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation.
Proposition 3.2. Suppose that a ∈πm(Sn) is the suspension of a homotopy class in πp(Sq). Then
a can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation for any k > (q/p)m.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
11
Proof. Let a0 be a homotopy class in πp(Sq) so that a is the (m −p)-fold suspension of a0.
Let f1 be a map in the homotopy class a0 from [0, 1]p to the unit q-sphere, taking the boundary
of the domain to the basepoint of Sq. Let f2 be a degree 1 map from [0, 1]m−p to the unit (m-p)-
sphere, taking the boundary of the domain to the basepoint of Sm−p. We can assume both maps
are smooth, and we pick a number L which is bigger than the Lipshitz constant of either map.
Inside of the unit m-sphere, we can bilipschitz embed a rectangle R with dimensions [0, ǫ]p ×
[0, ǫ−
p
m−p ]m−p. More precisely, there is an embedding I which is locally C(m)-bilipschitz. (See the
appendix in Section 14.2 for a construction of this embedding.)
Now we construct a map F from R to Sq × Sm−p. The map F is a direct product of a map F1
from [0, ǫ]p to Sq and a map F2 from [0, ǫ−
p
m−p ]m−p to Sm−p. The map F1 is just a rescaling from
[0, ǫ]p to the unit cube, composed with the map f1. Similarly, the map F2 is just a rescaling from
[0, ǫ−
p
m−p ]m−p to [0, 1]m−p, composed with the map f2.
When k is bigger than q, the k-dilation of F is less than (Lǫ−1)q(Lǫ
p
m−p )k−q. Expanding this
expression gives Lkǫ−q+(
p
m−p )(k−q). The important part of the expression is the power of ǫ, which
is equal to (
p
m−p)(k −q −q
p(m −p)) = (
p
m−p)(k −qm/p). We have assumed that k is greater than
qm/p, and so the exponent of ǫ is positive. For ǫ suﬃciently small, the k-dilation of F is arbitrarily
small.
The map F takes the boundary of R to Sq ∨Sm−p. We compose F with a smash map, which is
a degree 1 map from Sq × Sm−p to Sm+q−p = Sn, taking Sq ∨Sm−p to the base point. The result
is a map from R to Sn which takes the boundary of R to the basepoint. We can easily extend this
map to all of Sm by mapping the complement of R to the basepoint of Sn. The resulting map is
homotopic to a, and it has arbitrarily small k-dilation.
□
The following special case was stated in the introduction.
Proposition 3.3. Suppose that a ∈πm(Sn) is the suspension of a homotopy class in πm−1(Sn−1),
and that m > n. Then the class a can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small n-dilation.
Proof. This follows from Proposition 3.2. We take p = m −1 and q = n −1. Since m > n, we have
n > n−1
m−1m = (q/p)m.
□
Next we apply Proposition 3.2 to some particular homotopy classes.
First we consider maps from Sm to Sm−1. We prove Proposition 3.1.
Proof. For m ≥4, the non-trivial homotopy class in πm(Sm−1) is the (m-3)-fold suspension of the
Hopf ﬁbration from S3 to S2. Proposition 3.2 gives a map in this homotopy class with arbitrarily
small k-dilation for k > (2/3)m.
□
Next we consider the torsion classes in π7(S4).
Proposition 3.4. Each torsion homotopy class in π7(S4) can be realized by maps with arbitrarily
small 4-dilation.
Proof. Each torsion class is the suspension of a class from π6(S3). We apply Proposition 3.2 to get
maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation for all k > (3/6)7 = 3.5.
□
We remark that one element of π7(S4) is actually a double suspension of a class in π5(S2). We
can realize this element with arbitrarily small k-dilation for k > (2/5)7 = 2.8. In particular, we can
realize it by maps with arbitrarily small 3-dilation. I don’t know whether the other torsion classes
can be realized with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.


12
LARRY GUTH
There is one (non-zero) element a ∈π8(S5) which is a triple suspension of an element in π5(S2). It
can be realized with arbitrarily small 4-dilation, since 4 > (2/5)8. Recall that π8(S5) is isomorphic
to Z24. The element a above is the 2-torsion element - it corresponds to 12 in Z24. All of the
odd elements are detected by Steenrod squares. By the Steenrod square inequality, they cannot
be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation when k ≤9/2. In particular, they cannot be
realized with arbitrarily small 4-dilation.
The discussion of π8(S5) applies more generally to the stable 3-stem. For all m ≥8, πm(Sm−3) is
isomorphic to Z24, and the suspension maps are isomorphisms. Therefore, the two-torsion element
can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation for all k > (2/5)m. The odd elements can
be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation only if k > (m + 1)/2.
In the open problems section at the end of the paper, there is some more discussion of which
homotopy classes can be realized with arbitrarily small k-dilation.
The Freudenthal suspension theorem says that every map in πm(Sn) is a suspension as long as
m ≤2n −2. (See [H], corollary 4.24 on page 360.) The condition m ≤2n −2 is equivalent to
n > (m + 1)/2. As long as n > (m + 1)/2, the Freudenthal suspension theorem implies that every
class in πm(Sn) is the suspension of a class from π2m−2n+1(Sm−n+1). Proposition 3.2 then implies
the following weak form of the h-principle for k-dilation.
Proposition 3.5. If n > (m + 1)/2, and if k >
m−n+1
2m−2n+1m, then any map F0 : Sm →Sn can be
homotoped to a map F : Sm →Sn with arbitrarily small k-dilation.
Proposition 3.5 is weaker than the h-principle, but for many values of m and n it’s not a bad
substitute. For example, if F0 is a map from S101 to S88, then Proposition 3.5 implies that F0 can
be homotoped to a map with arbitrarily small k-dilation for all k > (14/27)101 = 52.37...: in other
words, for each integer k > 52. On the other hand, the h-principle says that F0 can be homotoped
to a map with arbitrarily small k-dilation for each k > (101 + 1)/2 = 51.
The suspension method is based on an observation of Bechtluft-Sachs in [BS]. He was interested
in the Lp norms ∥ΛkdF∥p. In [R], Riviere proved an Lp version of the Hopf invariant inequality.
Lp bound for the Hopf invariant. For any C1 map F : S2n−1 →Sn, the Hopf invariant of F
is controlled by
| Hopf(F)| ≤C(n)∥ΛndF∥2
L
2n−1
n
.
In particular, if F has non-zero Hopf invariant, then ∥ΛndF∥
L
2n−1
n
> c(n) > 0.
In particular, if F : S7 →S4 with non-zero Hopf invariant, then ∥Λ4dF∥7/4 ≥c > 0. Bechtluft-
Sachs observed that other homotopy classes in π7(S4) behave diﬀerently.
Bechtluft-Sachs example. For each torsion element a ∈π7(S4), there is a sequence of homo-
topically non-trivial maps Fi : S7 →S4 with ∥Λ4dF∥7/4 →0.
4. The Hopf invariant and k-dilation
Our lower bounds on k-dilation generalize the following inequality for maps from S3 to S2.
Proposition 4.1. If F is a C1 map from the unit sphere S3 to the unit sphere S2, then the Hopf
invariant of F is controlled in terms of the 2-dilation of F by the inequality
| Hopf(F)| ≲Dil2(F)2.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
13
In the ﬁrst part of this section, we review the previous proofs of the proposition from the
literature, and we discuss the diﬃculties of generalizing them to maps from Sm to Sm−1 for m > 3.
In the second part of this section, we give a new proof of the proposition. Our proof of k-dilation
estimates for maps Sm →Sm−1 generalizes the new proof for maps from S3 to S2.
4.1. Previous estimates about the Hopf invariant and 2-dilation. The ﬁrst proof of Propo-
sition 4.1 was based on diﬀerential forms. We begin by describing the Hopf invariant in the language
of diﬀerential forms. We let ω be a 2-form on S2 with
R
S2 ω = 1. The pullback F ∗ω is a closed
2-form on S3, and therefore F ∗ω is exact. Let α be a 1-form on S3 with dα = F ∗ω. Then the Hopf
invariant of F is
R
S3 α ∧F ∗ω. (See [BT], page 230, for background on the Hopf invariant.)
To get a quantitative estimate for the Hopf invariant, we can go step by step, giving quantitative
estimates for each character appearing in the story.
We sketch the proof here, and give more
details in the appendix in Section 12. First, we can choose ω to be (4π)−1dareaS2. So pointwise,
|ω| = (4π)−1 ≤1.
The 2-dilation interacts well with 2-forms, giving the estimate ∥F ∗ω∥∞≤
Dil2(F)∥ω∥∞≤Dil2(F) (see Proposition 2.5). The main part of the proof is to give estimates for
α. This requires some analysis and/or geometry. For example, using Hodge theory and elliptic
estimates, we can ﬁnd a choice of α with ∥α∥2 ≲∥F ∗ω∥2 ≲Dil2(F). With these bounds in hand,
| Hopf(F)| =

Z
S3 α ∧F ∗ω
 ≤∥α∥2∥F ∗ω∥2 ≲Dil2(F)2.
It’s hard to generalize this argument to maps Sm →Sm−1 when m > 3. For m > 3, πm(Sm−1) =
Z2. The homotopy invariant here takes values in Z2, and I don’t know any way to describe it using
diﬀerential forms.
A second proof of Proposition 4.1 studies the ﬁbers of the map F. By a smoothing argument,
we can deform F to a C∞map without signiﬁcantly increasing its 2-dilation. So we can assume
without loss of generality that F is C∞. Sard’s theorem guarantees that almost every y ∈S2 is a
regular value. When y is a regular value, the ﬁber F −1(y) is a smooth compact 1-manifold (without
boundary). Each regular ﬁber has a canonical orientation, so each regular ﬁber is an integral 1-cycle
in S3. Now the Hopf invariant can be described as the linking number of F −1(y1) and F −1(y2) for
any two regular values of F. Unwinding the deﬁnition of linking number this means the following.
Suppose that Σ1 is an integral 2-chain in S3 with ∂Σ1 = F −1(y1). For almost every choice of y2,
F −1(y2) will be transverse to Σ1. Then the Hopf invariant of F is given by the intersection number
of F −1(y2) with Σ1. (See [BT], page 227-234 for a discussion of the diﬀerent deﬁnitions of the Hopf
invariant and why they are equivalent.)
To get a quantitative estimate for the Hopf invariant, we again go step by step through the
argument and give quantitative estimates for each character as it appears. By the coarea inequality,
we can choose y1 so that Length[F −1(y1)] ≲Dil2(F). Next, by the isoperimetric inequality, we can
choose Σ1 so that Area(Σ1) ≲Length[F −1(y1)] ≲Dil2(F). Now by the coarea inequality again,
we can choose y2 so that the number of points in Σ1 ∩F −1(y2) is ≲Dil2(F)[Area Σ1] ≲Dil2(F)2.
The Hopf invariant is given by counting these intersection points with multiplicities ±1 determined
by the orientations. Therefore, | Hopf(F)| is at most the number of intersection points, which is
≲Dil2(F)2. (This argument ﬁrst appeared in [GFRM]. The details are explained in the short
paper [GURH].)
This argument also does not easily generalize to maps Sm →Sm−1 for m > 3. When m > 3, the
relevant homotopy invariant cannot be described using a linking number. It can be described using
the ﬁbers of the map F, together with their framing. For a regular value y ∈Sm−1, the ﬁber F −1(y)


14
LARRY GUTH
is a closed 1-manifold, and its normal bundle gets a framing coming from the isomorphism between
the normal bundle and T Sm−1
y
. The map F is homotopically non-trivial if and only if the framing
of the normal bundle has a non-trivial twist. (See Section 9 for a more detailed description.)
I tried to go step by step through the argument with the framing of the normal bundle and give
quantitative estimates, but I couldn’t make this approach work. We can begin in the same way,
by using the coarea formula to pick a point y ∈Sm−1 so that Length[F −1(y)] ≲Dilm−1(F). The
next character seems to be the framing of the normal bundle and the way that it twists as we move
along the ﬁber F −1(y). But this twisting depends on the second derivative of F, and so there is
no way to bound the amount of local twisting in terms of any Dilk(F). Within this setting it’s not
clear to me what geometric quantity one should try to bound next. Also notice that in bounding
the length of the ﬁber F −1(y), we only required an estimate for Dilm−1(F). A bound of the form
Dilm−1(F) < ǫ does not by itself imply that F is null-homotopic - we need to invoke somewhere
Dilk(F) for k ≤(m + 1)/2.
4.2. A new method for bounding the Hopf invariant in terms of the 2-dilation. Now we
give a new proof of Proposition 4.1, based on the connection between the Hopf invariant and cup
products. If F : S3 →S2, we use F as an attaching map to build a 4-dimensional cell complex X:
X := B4 ∪F S2. The homotopy type of X is a homotopy invariant of the map F. In particular, the
Hopf invariant of F is related to the cup product structure of X. The cohomology groups of X are
H2(X; Z) = Z with generator a and H4(X; Z) = Z with generator b. The cup product a ∪a must
be a multiple of b. Let H(X) be the integer so that a ∪a = H(X)b. The integer H(X) is the Hopf
invariant of the map F. (See [H] page 427 for a review of the Hopf invariant from this perspective.)
This deﬁnition does not seem at ﬁrst sight like a good setting for a quantitative argument. How
can we connect this story to Dil2(F)? What are the geometric quantities related to this story that
we should try to estimate?
Cup products are closely connected with Cartesian products. By unwinding the deﬁnition of the
cup product in terms of Cartesian products, we can get a formulation which is easier to connect
with the geometry of the map F. Here is the formulation. If F : S3 →S2 is our map, we can look
at the map F × F : S3 × S3 →S2 × S2. Let x0 be a basepoint of S3 and y0 = F(x0) be a basepoint
of S2.
Let Diag(S3) ⊂S3 × S3 denote the diagonal of S3 × S3. Let Bouquet(S3) denote the cycle
S3 × {x0} ∪{x0} × S3. Both Diag(S3) and Bouquet(S3) are integral cycles in S3 × S3, and they are
homologous. Therefore, there is an integral 4-chain Z0 with ∂Z0 = Diag(S3) −Bouquet(S3). We
consider F ×F(Z0). By deﬁnition, F ×F(Z0) is an integral 4-chain in S2×S2, but in fact F ×F(Z0)
is essentially a 4-cycle. The reason is that F ×F maps Diag(S3) into Diag(S2) and Bouquet(S3) into
Bouquet(S2). Therefore, F × F maps ∂Z0 (which is 3-dimensional) into a 2-dimensional complex.
Therefore, F × F(Z0) is essentially an integral 4-cycle in S2 × S2.
If we work with Lipschitz chains, then F × F(Z0) is not literally a cycle. But as we have seen,
the boundary of F × F(Z0) is a 3-cycle lying in a 2-dimensional polyhedron. Therefore, we can
pick an integral 4-chain ν with zero volume and with ∂ν = ∂(F × F(Z0)). We deﬁne Z(F) to be
the 4-cycle F × F(Z0) −ν. The cycle Z(F) is connected to the Hopf invariant by the following
proposition.
Proposition 4.2. The homology class of Z(F) in H4(S2 × S2; Z) is equal to Hopf(F)[S2] × [S2].
Using this proposition, we can give a short proof that | Hopf(F)| ≲Dil2(F)2.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
15
Proof. The Hopf invariant of F is equal to the homology class of Z(F) = F × F(Z0) −ν. Since
ν has zero 4-volume, we see that | Hopf(F)| ≲Vol4(F × F(Z0)) ≤Dil4(F × F) · Vol4(Z0). In our
construction Z0 does not depend on F, so Vol4(Z0) ≲1.
It suﬃces to check that Dil4(F×F) ≤Dil2(F)2. Let (x, x′) be a point of S3×S3. Let S1 ≥... ≥S4
be the singular values of d(F × F) at (x, x′). (So S1, S2, S3, S4 are functions on S3 × S3.) The
4-dilation of F × F is sup(x,x′)∈S3×S3 S1S2S3S4. Now let s1(x) ≥s2(x) be the singular values of
dFx. Since the derivative d(F × F) at (x, x′) is just dFx × dFx′, the singular values S1, S2, S3, S4
are equal to the numbers s1(x), s2(x), s1(x′), s2(x′) arranged in decreasing order. In particular,
S1S2S3S4 = s1(x)s2(x)s1(x′)s2(x′) ≤Dil2(F)2.
□
Now we prove Proposition 4.2.
Proof. As we recalled above, H2(X; Z) = Z with generator a. Let [X] be the generator of H4(X; Z),
deﬁned so that b([X]) = 1. We know that a ∪a evaluated on [X] is the Hopf invariant of F.
One deﬁnition of the cup product involves the diagonal embedding Diag : X →X × X. The cup
product a ∪a is the pullback of the cross product a × a deﬁned on X × X. Therefore, the Hopf
invariant of F is the evaluation of a × a on Diag(X).
Recall that the space X is formed by attaching B4 to S2 by the map F : S3 →S2. The space
X has a natural basepoint x, which is equal to the basepoint of S2 ⊂X. We deﬁne Bouquet(X) ⊂
X × X to be X × {x} ∪{x} × X. Now S2 ⊂X, and Z(F) ⊂S2 × S2 ⊂X × X, so Z(F) is a 4-cycle
in X × X. Next we determine its homology class.
Lemma 4.3. The 4-cycle Z(F) is homologous to Diag(X) −Bouquet(X) as integral 4-cycles in
X × X.
Proof. Recall that Z0 is a 4-chain in S3 × S3 with ∂Z0 = Diag(S3) −Bouquet(S3). We consider
Z0 ⊂S3 × S3 ⊂¯B4 × ¯B4, where ¯B4 denotes the closed 4-ball. The boundary of Diag( ¯B4) is
Diag(S3). We choose a basepoint of S3 and make it also a basepoint of ¯B4, so that the boundary
of Bouquet( ¯B4) is Bouquet(S3). Therefore, Z0 −Diag( ¯B4) + Bouquet( ¯B4) is a 4-cycle in ¯B4 × ¯B4.
Since ¯B4 × ¯B4 is contractible, this cycle is null-homologous, and so there is a 5-chain Y0 with
∂Y0 = Z0 −Diag( ¯B4) + Bouquet( ¯B4).
Let Ψ : ¯B4 →X be the characteristic map of B4 to X = B4∪F S2. In other words, the restriction
of Ψ to the boundary of ¯B4 is the attaching map F : S3 →S2 ⊂X, and Ψ is the inclusion map
from the interior of B4 into X. We choose base points so that Ψ maps the basepoint of ¯B4 to the
basepoint of X. We consider Ψ×Ψ : ¯B4× ¯B4 →X×X. The image Ψ×Ψ(∂Y0) is a null-homologous
cycle in X × X. This null-homologous cycle is essentially equal to Z(F) −Diag(X) + Bouquet(X).
More precisely,
• Ψ × Ψ(Z0) is ﬂat equivalent to Z(F).
• Ψ × Ψ(Diag( ¯B4)) is ﬂat equivalent to Diag(X).
• Ψ × Ψ(Bouquet( ¯B4)) is ﬂat equivalent to Bouquet(X).
We review ﬂat chains and cycles in Appendix 14.3. We say that two Lipschitz chains are ﬂat
equivalent if they deﬁne the same ﬂat chain. The main point that we need is that if two Lipschitz
cycles are ﬂat equivalent, then they are homologous. This follows easily from the deﬁnitions, and
we review it in the appendix. Given the three ﬂat equivalences we just mentioned, it follows that
Z(F) −Diag(X) + Bouquet(X) is null-homologous, which is what we wanted to prove.
The three ﬂat equivalences we just mentioned are straightforward. First, Z(F) = F ×F(Z0)−ν,
where ν is a chain of volume zero. Recall that the restriction of Ψ to S3 = ∂B4 is just F. Hence


16
LARRY GUTH
the restriction of Ψ × Ψ to S3 × S3 is F × F, and so we see Z(F) = Ψ × Ψ(Z0) −ν. Since ν has
zero volume, Z(F) is ﬂat equivalent to Ψ × Ψ(Z0).
Next we consider the chain Ψ( ¯B4). If we consider it as a Lipschitz chain, then it is not literally
a cycle, but its boundary lies in S2 ⊂X. Therefore, we can ﬁnd an 4-chain ν′ of zero volume so
that Ψ( ¯B4) −ν′ is a Lipschitz cycle in X. It is homologous to the fundamental homology class [X].
Any two Lipschitz cycles in this homology class are ﬂat equivalent (see the appendix). So Ψ( ¯B4)
is ﬂat equivalent to the cycle X. Similarly, Ψ × Ψ(Diag( ¯B4)) is ﬂat equivalent to Diag(X), and
Ψ × Ψ(Bouquet( ¯B4)) is ﬂat equivalent to Bouquet(X).
□
The Hopf invariant of F is a × a(Diag(X)). By the last lemma, this is equal to a × a(Z(F) +
Bouquet(X)).
For any point p ∈X, a × a(X × {p}) = a × a({p} × X) = 0.
Therefore, a ×
a(Bouquet(X)) = 0. Hence Hopf(F) = a × a(Z(F)). Now Z(F) is a cycle in S2 × S2 ⊂X × X.
The restriction of a to S2 is just [S2]∗, the generator of H2(S2; Z). Therefore, Z(F) is homologous
to Hopf(F)[S2] × [S2].
□
This argument gives another proof that | Hopf(F)| ≲Dil2(F)2. In the next sections, we will
generalize this proof to homotopically non-trivial maps Sm →Sm−1 for m > 3. When m > 3,
we will need to consider Steenrod squares instead of cup squares. In the next section, we review
Steenrod squares and deﬁne an analogous cycle Z(F) in that setting.
5. Mappings detected by Steenrod squares
Suppose that F : Sm →Sn is a C1 map. We can use F as an attaching map to build a cell
complex X = Bm+1 ∪F Sn. We assume that m > n. In that case, the cohomology of X has the
following structure: Hn(X; Z2) = Z2 with generator a, Hm+1(X; Z2) = Z2 with generator b, and
Hd(X; Z2) vanishes for all other dimensions d > 0. The Steenrod square Sqm+1−n maps Hn(X; Z2)
to Hm+1(X; Z2). We deﬁne the Steenrod-Hopf invariant of F by the formula
Sqm+1−n(a) = SH(F)b.
The Steenrod-Hopf invariant takes values in Z2. It is a homotopy invariant of the map F (because
homotopic maps F1 and F2 produce homotopy-equivalent complexes X1 and X2).
We recall some fundamental topological facts about the Steenrod-Hopf invariant. These facts
are explained in more detail in Hatcher’s book [H], page 489. This is a very nice reference about
Steenrod squares, containing all the background material we need in this paper.
If m = 2n −1, then the Steenrod square Sqm+1−n = Sqn is the cup square. In this case SH(F)
is the mod 2 reduction of the Hopf invariant of F. The Hopf invariant is equal to 1 for the three
Hopf ﬁbrations (S3 →S2, S7 →S4, and S15 →S8). So SH(F) = 1 for the three Hopf ﬁbrations.
Because Steenrod squares behave well with respect to suspensions, the Steenrod-Hopf invariant
is preserved by suspensions. Suppose that ΣF : Sm+1 →Sn+1 is the suspension of F : Sm →
Sn. The complex formed by ΣF, Bm+2 ∪ΣF Sn+1, is the suspension of Bm+1 ∪F Sn. Since the
Steenrod squares commute with the suspension isomorphism, we conclude that SH(ΣF) = SH(F).
In particular, SH(F) = 1 for suspensions of the Hopf ﬁbrations.
Therefore, the map SH : πm(Sn) →Z2 is surjective whenever n = m−1 and m ≥3; or n = m−3
and m ≥7; or n = m−7 and m ≥15. (By a diﬃcult theorem of Adams, the Steenrod-Hopf invariant
is trivial for all other m > n - see page 490 of [H] and the references therein.)
Our lower bound for k-dilation is the following theorem:


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
17
Steenrod squares and k-dilation. Let F be a C1 map from Sm to Sn with SH(F) ̸= 0. If
k ≤(m + 1)/2, then Dilk(F) ≥c(m) > 0.
We have to review the topological proof that a map with SH(F) ̸= 0 is non-contractible and try
to organize it in order to get quantitative information about Dilk(F). In the following subsection,
we give an alternate description of SH(F), which we will be able to connect with Dilk(F). We will
check that the alternate deﬁnition agrees with the deﬁnition above, which involves reviewing the
construction of Steenrod squares.
5.1. The cycle Z(F). The Steenrod squares are closely related to the following topological op-
eration. Given a space X and an integer i ≥0, ﬁrst consider the product Si × X × X. On this
product, there is a natural Z2 action, sending (θ, x1, x2) to (−θ, x2, x1). This action is free and the
quotient space is denoted ΓiX. The space ΓiX is a ﬁber bundle over RPi with ﬁber X × X.
The operation Γi is functorial - if we have a map F : X →Y , then there is an induced map
ΓiF : ΓiX →ΓiY . The induced map is deﬁned as follows. First we map Si × X × X to Si × Y × Y
using the map id×F ×F. (Here id denotes the identity map.) This map is equivariant with respect
to the Z2 action on the domain and on the range. Therefore, it descends to a map ΓiF between
the quotient spaces.
In particular, our map F : Sm →Sn induces a map ΓiF from ΓiSm to ΓiSn for every i.
If W ⊂X is a mod 2 cycle, then there are several cycles in ΓiX that we can canonically build
from W.
One of these is the diagonal cycle Diag(W).
In each ﬁber of ΓiX →RPi, the ﬁber
of Diag(W) is a diagonal copy of W ⊂W × W ⊂X × X. A second example is the bouquet
cycle Bouquet(W). This is deﬁned canonically as long as X has a basepoint x. In each ﬁber of
ΓiX →RPi, the ﬁber of Bouquet(W) is W × {x} ∪{x} × W ⊂X × X. If W is a mod 2 d-cycle,
then Diag(W) and Bouquet(W) are mod 2 (d+i)-cycles.
Remark: If W is an integral d-cycle, it is not necessarily possible to choose orientations in order
to make Diag(W) and Bouquet(W) into integral cycles.
Lemma 5.1. If i < m, then Hd(ΓiSm) = 0 for m + i < d < 2m (with any coeﬃcient group).
Proof. There is a natural cell structure on ΓiSm which comes from the usual cell structure on Sm
(with 2 cells) and the usual cell structure on RPi with i + 1 cells. Since i < m, the cell structure
has one cell in each dimension 0, ..., i, two cells in each dimension m, ..., m + i, and one cell in each
dimension 2m, ..., 2m + i. In particular, we see that Hd(ΓiSm) vanishes for m + i < d < 2m.
□
Lemma 5.2. If i < m, then Diag(Sm) and Bouquet(Sm) are homologous - they belong to the same
homology class in Hm+i(ΓiSm; Z2).
Proof. First, the diagonal of Sm × Sm is homologous to the bouquet {x} × Sm ∪Sm × {x}, where
x denotes the basepoint of Sm. We let T0 denote a homology between them. Now we consider
Bi × T0, which is an (m+i+1)-chain in Bi × Sm × Sm.
Here we think of Bi as a hemisphere
of Si, so that we can project Bi × Sm × Sm onto ΓiSm. The boundary of Bi × T0 is equal to
Bi × Diag(Sm) + Bi × Bouquet(Sm) + V where V is a chain in ∂Bi × Sm × Sm. Projecting Bi × T0
into ΓiSm, we get a chain with boundary Diag(Sm) + Bouquet(Sm) + V ′, where V ′ is an (m+i)-
chain lying in Γi−1Sm ⊂ΓiSm. Because Diag(Sm) and Bouquet(Sm) are each cycles, V ′ must also
be a cycle. But as we saw in Lemma 5.1, Hm+i(Γi−1Sm) = 0. Hence V ′ is homologous to zero and
the diagonal Diag(Sm) is homologous to Bouquet(Sm).
□


18
LARRY GUTH
At this point, we choose i = 2n −m −1. Since m > n, we see that i < n < m. Since i < m, we
can ﬁnd an (m+i+1)-chain Z0 in ΓiSm with ∂Z0 = Diag(Sm) + Bouquet(Sm). The dimension of
the chain Z0 is m + i + 1 = 2n.
Our map F : Sm →Sn induces a map ΓiF : ΓiSm →ΓiSn. The map ΓiF maps Diag(Sm) to
Diag(Sn). We pick basepoints of Sm and Sn so that F sends basepoint to basepoint. With these
basepoints, ΓiF maps Bouquet(Sm) to Bouquet(Sn). Therefore, ΓiF maps ∂Z0 into Diag(Sn) ∪
Bouquet(Sn). Now ∂Z0 is a cycle of dimension i + m. On the other hand, Diag(Sn) ∪Bouquet(Sn)
is a polyhedron of dimension i + n < i + m. Therefore ΓiF(Z0) is essentially a cycle.
Although ΓiF(Z0) is not literally a Lipschitz cycle, we have seen that the boundary of ΓiF(Z0) is
an (m+i)-cycle lying in a lower-dimensional polyhedron. Therefore, we can pick a mod 2 (m+i+1)-
chain ν with zero volume and with ∂ν = ∂ΓiF(Z0). We deﬁne Z(F) to be the cycle ΓiF(Z0) −ν.
Next we study the homology class of Z(F) in H2n(ΓiSn; Z2). First we calculate this homology
group.
Lemma 5.3. Recall that i = 2n −m −1 and m > n. The homology group H2n(ΓiSn; Z2) = Z2.
The non-trivial homology class is represented by a ﬁber Sn × Sn of the ﬁber bundle Sn × Sn →
ΓiSn →RPi.
Proof. We use the cell structure of ΓiSn as in the proof of Lemma 5.1. Since i = 2n −m −1 < n,
this cell structure has exactly one cell in dimension 2n. Recall that ΓiSn is a ﬁber-bundle over RPi
with ﬁber Sn × Sn. The 2n-cell corresponds to a ﬁber of the ﬁber bundle - its closure is a ﬁber
Sn × Sn. The cell structure also has exactly one 2n + 1-cell. Its closure is the restriction of the
ﬁber bundle to a copy of RP1 ⊂RPi. The boundary of this (2n + 1)-cell gives two copies of the
2n-cell, and so the boundary operator (working modulo 2) is zero.
□
Now we determine the homology class of Z(F) and see how it connects to the Steenrod-Hopf
invariant.
Proposition 5.4. Let Z0 ⊂ΓiSm be any 2n-chain with boundary Diag(Sm) −Bouquet(Sm), and
deﬁne the 2n-cycle Z(F) ⊂ΓiSn as above. Then the 2n-cycle Z(F) is homologous to SH(F)[Sn ×
Sn], where Sn × Sn is a ﬁber of the ﬁber bundle ΓiSn. In particular, the Steenrod-Hopf invariant
SH(F) is non-zero if and only if the cycle Z(F) is non-trivial in H2n(ΓiSn; Z2).
This Proposition is a generalization of Proposition 4.2.
Proof. Recall that X = Bm+1 ∪F Sn. The cohomology group Hn(X; Z2) is isomorphic to Z2 and
it has generator a. We let [X] be a generator of Hm+1(X; Z2) = Z2. The Steenrod-Hopf invariant
SH(F) is equal to the evaluation Sqi a[X]. Now we unwind the deﬁnition of Steenrod squares to
understand this evaluation better. We follow the construction of Steenrod squares in Hatcher, [H],
pages 501-4.
The class a induces a map Φ from X to K(Z2, n), which is well-deﬁned up to homotopy. From
now on, we abbreviate K(Z2, n) = K. Therefore, we get a sequence of maps
RPi × X →ΓiX →ΓiK.
The ﬁrst map is the diagonal inclusion, and the second map is ΓiΦ.
The space K comes with a fundamental cohomology class α ∈Hn(K; Z2), and Φ∗α = a. Now in
ΓiK there is a (2n)-dimensional cohomology class β, whose restriction to each ﬁber K × K is α × α
and whose restriction to Bouquet(K) ⊂ΓiK vanishes. This element is constructed in Hatcher,


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
19
pages 503-504. (Hatcher constructs the element λ(i) on the space ΛK. He has already deﬁned a
map from ΓiK to ΛK, and the class β is the pullback of λ(i) to ΓiK).
Let ω ∈H1(RPi; Z2) be the non-trivial cohomology class. We pull back the cohomology class β
to RPi × X, and expand it using the Kunneth formula. The deﬁnition of the Steenrod squares is
that this pullback is equal to
n
X
j=0
ωj ⊗Sqj a.
Using the diagram of maps above, we see that
SH(F) = Sqi a[X] = Diag∗ΓiΦ∗(β)[RPi × X] = ΓiΦ∗(β)[Diag(X)].
We have an inclusion Sn ⊂X and hence ΓiSn ⊂ΓiX. So our cycle Z(F) is a 2n-cycle in ΓiX.
Lemma 5.5. The cycle Z(F) is homologous to Diag(X) −Bouquet(X) in ΓiX.
This lemma is a generalization of Lemma 4.3.
Proof. Recall that Z0 is a chain in ΓiSm with ∂Z0 = Diag(Sm) + Bouquet(Sm). We think of the
sphere Sm as the boundary of the closed ball Bm+1, and so ΓiSm ⊂Γi ¯Bm+1. Therefore, we can
think of Z0 as a chain in Γi ¯Bm+1. The boundary of Diag( ¯Bm+1) is Diag(Sm) and the boundary of
Bouquet( ¯Bm+1) is Bouquet(Sm). Therefore, Z0 −Diag( ¯Bm+1) + Bouquet( ¯Bm+1) is an (m+i+1)-
cycle in Γi ¯Bm+1. Since Γi ¯Bm+1 is homotopic to RPi, this cycle is null-homologous, and so there is
a chain Y0 with
∂Y0 = Z0 −Diag( ¯Bm+1) + Bouquet( ¯Bm+1).
Let Ψ : ¯Bm+1 →X be the characteristic map of Bm+1 to X = Bm+1 ∪F Sn. In other words,
the restriction of Ψ to the boundary of ¯Bm+1 is the attaching map F : Sm →Sn ⊂X, and Ψ
is the inclusion map from the interior of Bm+1 into X. We choose base points so that Ψ maps
the basepoint of ¯Bm+1 to the basepoint of X. We consider ΓiΨ : Γi ¯Bm+1 →ΓiX. The image
ΓiΨ(∂Y0) is a null-homologous cycle in ΓiX. This null-homologous cycle is essentially equal to
Z(F) −Diag(X) + Bouquet(X). More precisely,
• ΓiΨZ0 is ﬂat equivalent to Z(F).
• ΓiΨ Diag( ¯Bm+1) is ﬂat equivalent to Diag(X).
• ΓiΨ Bouquet( ¯Bm+1) is ﬂat equivalent to Bouquet(X).
We review ﬂat chains and cycles in Appendix 14.3. We say that two Lipschitz chains are ﬂat
equivalent if they deﬁne the same ﬂat chain. The main point that we need is that if two Lipschitz
cycles are ﬂat equivalent, then they are homologous. This follows easily from the deﬁnitions, and
we review it in the appendix. Given the three ﬂat equivalences we just mentioned, it follows that
Z(F) −Diag(X) + Bouquet(X) is null-homologous, which is what we wanted to prove.
The three ﬂat equivalences we just mentioned are straightforward. First, Z(F) = ΓiF(Z0) −ν,
where ν is a chain of volume zero. Recall that the restriction of Ψ to Sm = ∂Bm+1 is just F. Hence
the restriction of ΓiΨ to ΓiSm is ΓiF, and so we see Z(F) = ΓiΨ(Z0)−ν. Since ν has zero volume,
Z(F) is ﬂat equivalent to ΓiΨ(Z0).
Next we consider the chain Ψ( ¯Bm+1).
If we consider it as a Lipschitz chain, then it is not
literally a cycle, but its boundary lies in Sn ⊂X, and n < m. Therefore, we can ﬁnd an (m+1)-
chain ν′ of zero volume so that Ψ( ¯Bm+1) −ν′ is a Lipschitz cycle in X. It is homologous to the


20
LARRY GUTH
fundamental homology class [X]. Any two Lipschitz cycles in this homology class are ﬂat equivalent
(see the appendix). So Ψ( ¯Bm+1) is ﬂat equivalent to the cycle X. Similarly, ΓiΨ Diag( ¯Bm+1) is
ﬂat equivalent to Diag(X), and ΓiΨ Bouquet( ¯Bm+1) is ﬂat equivalent to Bouquet(X).
□
We now know that SH(F) = ΓiΦ∗(β)[Diag(X)] = ΓiΦ∗(β)[Z(F) + Bouquet(X)]. The cohomol-
ogy class ΓiΦ∗(β) vanishes on Bouquet(X) because ΓiΦ maps Bouquet(X) to Bouquet(K), and β
vanishes on Bouquet(K). Therefore, SH(F) = ΓiΦ∗(β)[Z(F)].
The cycle Z(F) lies in ΓiSn. So next we consider the restriction of ΓiΦ∗(β) to ΓiSn. We recall
from Lemma 5.3 that H2n(ΓiSn; Z2) = Z2, and a non-trivial representative is given by the ﬁber
Sn×Sn. Recall that ΓiΦ∗(β) restricted to the ﬁber X×X is a×a. Therefore, ΓiΦ∗(β)(Sn×Sn) = 1.
Therefore, Z(F) is homologous to SH(F)Sn × Sn.
□
To summarize, our deﬁnition of the Steenrod-Hopf invariant in terms of the cycle Z(F) agrees
with the standard deﬁnition in terms of Steenrod squares on X.
Describing SH(F) in terms of the homology class of Z(F) makes it more approachable geo-
metrically.
Next we will prove estimates about the geometry of Z(F) in terms of Dilk(F).
If
k ≤(m + 1)/2, and if Dilk(F) is suﬃciently small, then we will be able to use these estimates to
construct a null-homology of Z(F).
6. Directed volume
In this section, we study the geometry of the cycle Z(F) constructed in Section 5.1. We will
estimate the volume of Z(F). If the volume of Z(F) were suﬃciently small, it would follow that
Z(F) was null-homologous and that SH(F) = 0. But it turns out that even if Dilk(F) is very
small (and k ≤(m + 1)/2), the volume of Z(F) may still be arbitrarily large. This point is the
main diﬃculty in our proof. We will get more information about the shape of Z(F) by studying
its directed volumes in diﬀerent directions. Later we will use this information to show that Z(F)
is homologically trivial. We begin the section by deﬁning directed volumes.
To get some intuition for directed volumes, we start with the simple case that X is a compact
submanifold of Euclidean space RN. Suppose that X has dimension d, and let J be a d-tuple of
integers from the set 1, .., N. Let RJ denote the d-dimensional coordinate plane corresponding to
J, and let πJ denote the orthogonal projection from RN to RJ. Let |π−1
J (q)∩X| denote the number
of points in π−1
J (q) ∩X. Then the J-volume of X is given by the formula
VolJ(X) :=
Z
RJ |π−1
j (q) ∩X|dq.
If X is an oriented submanifold, then we can integrate diﬀerential forms over it. We can then
redeﬁne the J-volume as
VolJ(X) :=
sup
∥w∥∞≤1
Z
X
w(x)dxJ.
Next we want to deﬁne the directed volume of C1 chains in RN. Suppose that f is a C1 map
from the simplex ∆d to RN. Since the map f may not be an embedding, we need to be slightly
more careful in deﬁning VolJ f.
Let us recall the deﬁnition of Vol f, written in a slightly non-standard way which generalizes for
our purposes.
We deﬁne the k-dilation of f at a point x by the formula


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
21
Dilk f(x) = sup
ω |Λkdf ∗
xω|,
where the sup is taken over all ω ∈ΛkT ∗RN with |ω| ≤1.
Then if f : ∆d →RN is a C1 map, we deﬁne Vold f :=
R
∆Dild f(x)dx.
If J is a k-tuple of numbers from 1 to N, we can deﬁne DilJ f(x) in a similar way:
DilJ f(x) = |Λkdf ∗
xe∗
J|,
where e∗
J ∈ΛkT ∗RN. If J = {j1, ..., jk}, then e∗
J = e∗
j1 ∧... ∧e∗
jk. Here e1, ..., eN are the standard
orthonormal basis of T RN and e∗
1, ..., e∗
N are the dual basis of T ∗RN.
If f : ∆d →RN and J is a d-tuple, then we can deﬁne VolJ f :=
R
∆DilJ f(x)dx.
Now if T = P
i cifi is a mod 2 d-chain, then we deﬁne Vold T = P |ci| Vold fi, and VolJ T =
P
i |ci| VolJ fi, where |1| = 1 and |0| = 0. (We can do the same for chains with coeﬃcients in a
group G as long as we pick a norm on G.)
Some of this structure survives to Riemannian manifolds and products of Riemannian manifolds.
If f : ∆d →(M, g), then deﬁne Dilk f(x) = supω |df ∗
xω|, where ω ∈ΛkT ∗
f(x)M and |ω| ≤1. Then
we can deﬁne Vold f :=
R
∆Dild f(x)dx. This agrees with the standard deﬁnition of the volume. We
deﬁne the volume of a chain T as above.
Consider a product manifold M = A×B ×C with a product Riemannian metric. (In this paper,
we will work with products of three factors, but the deﬁnition works equally well with any number
of factors.) If f is a C1 map from ∆d to M, we deﬁne Dil(a,b,c) f(x) by the formula
Dil(a,b,c) f(x) := sup |df ∗
x(α ∧β ∧γ)|,
where α ∈ΛaT ∗A with |α| ≤1, β ∈ΛbT ∗B with |β| ≤1, and γ ∈ΛcT ∗C with |γ| ≤1.
If a+b+c = d then we can deﬁne the (a, b, c)-volume of f by Vol(a,b,c)(f) := R
∆Dil(a,b,c) f(x)dx.
We can deﬁne the (a,b,c)-volume of a chain by Vol(a,b,c)(P cifi) = P |ci| Vol(a,b,c)(fi).
Lemma 6.1. If T is a d-chain in (M N, g), and M is a product manifold A × B × C with a product
Riemannian metric, then Vold T is comparable to P
a+b+c=d Vol(a,b,c)(T ).
Proof. It suﬃces to check that for each f : ∆d →M and each x, Dild f(x) is comparable to
P
a+b+c=d Dil(a,b,c) f(x).
It follows from the deﬁnition that Dil(a,b,c) f(x) ≤Dild f(x) for each (a, b, c), because α ∧β ∧γ ∈
ΛdT ∗M and has norm ≤1.
On the other hand, if ω is an element of ΛdT ∗M with |ω| ≤1, then we can expand ω as a sum of
C(N) terms αi ∧βi ∧γi, where αi ∈ΛaiT ∗A, βi ∈ΛbiT ∗B, etc., and |αi|, |βi|, |γi| ≤1. Therefore,
Dild f(x) ≤C(N) P
a+b+c=d Dil(a,b,c) f(x).
□
It’s worth mentioning the special case of polyhedral chains. Suppose ﬁrst that we triangulate A,
B, and C, and take the product polyhedral structure on M. Then each d-cell of the structure is
a product of simplices ∆a × ∆b × ∆c with a + b + c = d, where ∆a ⊂A, etc. So each d-cell can
be assigned a “direction” (a, b, c) telling how many dimensions of the cell come from A, from B,
and from C. A polyhedral d-chain is a linear combination of these d-cells. Since we are working
mod 2, we can think of a polyhedral d-chain as just a subset of these cells. The (a, b, c)-volume of
a polyhedral chain is just the total volume of all d-cells in T with “direction” (a, b, c).
The directed volumes Vol(a,b,c)(T ) behave well with respect to product maps.


22
LARRY GUTH
Lemma 6.2. Suppose M1 = A1 × B1 × C1 and M2 = A2 × B2 × C2 are Riemannian products.
Suppose that Φ : M1 →M2 is a product of maps Φ = ΦA × ΦB × ΦC, where ΦA : A1 →A2, etc.
Suppose that T is a d-chain in M1 and that a + b + c = d.
Then Vol(a,b,c)(Φ(T )) ≤(Dila ΦA)(Dilb ΦB)(Dilc ΦC) Vol(a,b,c)(T ).
Proof. It suﬃces to prove this inequality for a map f : ∆d →M1.
It suﬃces to prove that
Dil(a,b,c)(Φ ◦f)(x) ≤(Dila ΦA)(Dilb ΦB)(Dilc ΦC) Dil(a,b,c) f(x). Let α ∈ΛaT ∗A2 with |α| ≤1 and
analogously β and γ.
|d(Φ ◦f)∗
x(α ∧β ∧γ)| = |df ∗
x(α′ ∧β′ ∧γ′)|,
where α′ = dΦ∗
Aα, and analogously β′ and γ′. Now |α′| ≤Dila ΦA, and analogously |β′| and |γ′|.
Therefore,
|df ∗
x(α′ ∧β′ ∧γ′)| ≤(Dila ΦA)(Dilb ΦB)(Dilc ΦC) Dil(a,b,c) f(x).
□
Finally, we adapt this idea to twisted products ΓiSn. The double cover of ΓiSn is Si × Sn × Sn.
We take the product of unit sphere metrics on Si × Sn × Sn. We can deﬁne the (a, b, c)-volume of
a chain in Si × Sn × Sn. Let I be the involution of Si × Sn × Sn deﬁned by
I(θ, x1, x2) = (−θ, x2, x1).
Recall that ΓiSn is the quotient of Si×Sn×Sn by the involution I. The antipodal map on Si has
no eﬀect on directional volumes. Switching the two Sn factors does. So we see that Vol(a,b,c)(I(T )) =
Vol(a,c,b)(T ). Therefore, in ΓiSn we cannot make a meaningful distinction between Vol(a,b,c) and
Vol(a,c,b). But except for this ambiguity, we can deﬁne directional volumes. For a chain T in ΓiSn,
let ˜T denote the double cover of T in Si × Sn × Sn and deﬁne
Vol(a,b,c)(T ) := (1/2) Vol(a,b,c)( ˜T) = (1/2) Vol(a,c,b)( ˜T ).
The directed volumes behave well with respect to the maps ΓiF.
Lemma 6.3. If F : Sm →Sn, and T is a d-chain in ΓiSm, then
Vol(a,b,c) ΓiF(T ) ≤Dilb(F) Dilc(F) Vol(a,b,c)(T ).
Proof. Let ˜T be the double cover of T in Si × Sm × Sm. Then the double cover of ΓiF(T ) is
(id × F × F)( ˜T ). Therefore, Vol(a,b,c) ΓiF(T ) is bounded by (1/2) Vol(a,b,c)(id × F × F)( ˜T). By
Lemma 6.2, this is ≤(1/2) Dilb(F) Dilc(F) Vol(a,b,c) ˜T = Dilb(F) Dilc(F) Vol(a,b,c) T .
□
We introduced this language because the directed volumes of Z(F) are related to the k-dilation
of F.
Proposition 6.4. Let F : Sm →Sn be a C1 mapping and let Z(F) be the mod 2 cycle in ΓiSn
deﬁned in Section 5.1. (Recall that i = 2n −m −1.) Then the directional volumes of Z(F) are
bounded by the following inequality.
Vol(a,b,c)(Z(F)) ≤C(m) Dilb(f) Dilc(f).


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
23
Proof. Recall that Z(F) is ΓiF(Z0) + ν, where Z0 is a 2n-chain in ΓiSm and ν is a 2n-chain with
zero volume. The chain ν contributes zero directed volume in any direction. Using Lemma 6.3,
we see that Vol(a,b,c)(Z(F)) ≤Dilb(F) Dilc(F) Vol(a,b,c)(Z0). But Z0 is independent of F, and so
Vol(a,b,c)(Z0) ≤C(m).
□
Estimating all the directed volumes of Z(F) allows us to estimate its total volume.
Corollary 6.5. If Dilm+1−n(F) ≤1, then the volume of Z(F) is bounded as follows:
Vol Z(F) < C(m) Dilm+1−n(F)
m+1
m+1−n .
Proof. The possible directed volumes of Z(F) are given by directions (a, b, c) where a + b + c = 2n,
and a ≤2n −m −1, b ≤n, and c ≤n. From the ﬁrst inequality, we see that b + c ≥m + 1. Since
b, c ≤n we conclude that b and c are each at least m + 1 −n. Let D = Dilm+1−n(F)
1
m+1−n . Then
Dilb(F) ≤Db for all b ≥m + 1 −n (by Proposition 2.4). So for every (a, b, c), Vol(a,b,c)(Z(F)) ≤
C(m)DbDc. Since D ≤1, this quantity is ≤C(m)Dm+1, which is the right-hand side. Since every
directed volume obeys the desired bound, so does the total volume.
□
Our bound for the volume of Z(F) has the following corollary connecting SH(F) with some
k-dilations of F.
Corollary 6.6. If the Steenrod Hopf invariant SH(F) is non-zero, then Dilm+1−n(F) ≥c(m) > 0.
Proof. If Dilm+1−n(F) is very small, then the volume of Z(F) is very small.
By the Federer-
Fleming deformation theorem it follows that Z(F) is null-homologous. Hence SH(F) = 0.
□
This estimate is much weaker than the one we want to prove, but it still has some content. For
example, if F is a homotopically non-trivial map from Sm to Sm−1, then the corollary says that
Dil2(F) is bounded below. The sharp theorem says that Dilk(F) is bounded below for k ≤m+1
2 .
The corollary gives the sharp value of k when m = 3 or 4, but not when m ≥5. If we look at a map
from Sm to Sm−3, with non-trivial Steenrod-Hopf invariant, then the corollary says that Dil4(F) is
bounded below. The theorem says that Dilk(F) is bounded below for all k ≤m+1
2 . The corollary
gives the sharp value of k when m = 7, 8, but not when m ≥9.
This corollary includes our ﬁrst new lower bound on k-dilation: a map F : S8 →S5 with non-zero
Steenrod-Hopf invariant must have Dil4(F) ≥c > 0.
Now we suppose that Dilk(F) is tiny for some k ≤(m + 1)/2, and we wish to prove that Z(F)
is null-homologous. We cannot bound the total volume of Z(F), but we can bound the volume in
some directions.
Lemma 6.7. Suppose that Dilk(F) ≤1.
If b and c are each ≥k, then the directed volume
Vol(a,b,c) Z(F) is ≲Dilk(F)2.
Proof. By Proposition 6.4, the directed volume Vol(a,b,c) Z(F) is ≲Dilb(F) Dilc(F). Since b, c ≥k,
we know that Dilb(F)1/b ≤Dilk(F)1/k (by Proposition 2.4). Since Dilk(F) ≤1, we see that Dilb(F)
and Dilc(F) are both ≤Dilk(F).
□
We call a direction (a, b, c) bad if |b −c| ≤1 and good if |b −c| ≥2. If k ≤(m + 1)/2, then the
directed volume of Z(F) in the bad directions is controlled by the following lemma.
Lemma 6.8. If k ≤(m + 1)/2, and if (a, b, c) is a bad direction in ΓiSn, then b and c are ≥k.
Therefore, if Dilk F ≤1, then


24
LARRY GUTH
Vol(a,b,c)(Z(F)) ≲Dilk(F)2.
Proof. Once we know that b, c ≥k, then the estimate follows from Lemma 6.7. Since Z(F) is a
cycle of dimension 2n, a + b + c = 2n. We know that a ≤i = 2n −m −1. Therefore, b + c ≥m + 1.
Since (a, b, c) is a bad direction, |b −c| ≤1. It is just an elementary computation to check that b
and c are at least k.
There are two cases depending on whether m is even or odd.
If m is even, then k ≤m/2. We know that 2b + 1 ≥b + c ≥m + 1, and we see that b ≥m/2 ≥k.
By a symmetrical argument, c ≥k.
If m is odd, and b + c = m + 1, then we must have b = c. In this case, b = c = (m + 1)/2 ≥k. If
m is odd and b + c ≥m + 2, then we see that 2b + 1 ≥b + c ≥m + 2, and so b ≥(m + 1)/2 ≥k.
By a symmetrical argument, c ≥k.
□
We know that Z(F) has only a small volume in bad directions, and we want to prove that Z(F)
is null-homologous. As a toy problem, let’s consider a polyhedral 2n-cycle X with zero volume in
the bad directions. The next proposition shows that such a cycle is null-homologous. To make the
situation precise, suppose we choose any triangulation of Sn. Then let us choose any triangulation
of Si which is invariant with respect to the antipodal map. Taking the product, we get a polyhedral
structure on Si×Sn×Sn which is invariant with respect to our involution I(θ, x1, x2) = (−θ, x2, x1).
So it descends to give a polyhedral structure on ΓiSn. Each face in the polyhedral structure has a
direction (a, b, c) well deﬁned up to the equivalence (a, b, c) ∼(a, c, b). Each face is either good or
bad (because |b −c| ≤1 if and only if |c −b| ≤1).
Proposition 6.9. Let X be a polyhedral (2n)-cycle in ΓiSn which does not contain any 2n-faces
in bad directions. Then X is homologically trivial.
Proof. Let ˜X be the double cover of X in Si × Sn × Sn. So ˜X is a polyhedral cycle with no faces
in the bad directions. The good directions (a, b, c) all have b ̸= c, so we can divide them into two
categories: the directions where b < c, and the directions where b > c. We let ˜X1 be the chain
given by adding all the faces of ˜X where b < c, and we let ˜X2 be the chain given by adding the
faces where b > c. So ˜X = ˜X1 + ˜X2.
Now comes the crucial point.
Because of the estimate |b −c| ≥2 for good directions, the
boundaries ∂˜X1 and ∂˜X2 are disjoint! If we consider a face □1 in ˜X1 lying in direction (a1, b1, c1),
then we know that b1 ≤c1 −2. Now consider a face of ∂□1, and say that it lies in direction
(¯a1,¯b1, ¯c1). The vector (¯a1,¯b1, ¯c1) can be found by taking (a1, b1, c1) and subtracting 1 from one of
the three entries. Therefore, ¯b1 < ¯c1. We repeat the analysis for a face □2 in ˜X2. It has direction
(a2, b2, c2) with b2 ≥c2 + 2. A face in the boundary of □2 has direction (¯a2,¯b2, ¯c2), and ¯b2 > ¯c2.
Hence ∂˜X1 and ∂˜X2 have no faces in common. Since ∂˜X1 + ∂˜X2 = ∂˜X = 0, we see that ˜X1 and
˜X2 are each cycles!
Now ˜X is a double cover of X. Each face of X lifts to two faces of ˜X, one lying in ˜X1 and one
lying in ˜X2. For example, if X is 8-dimensional, a face of X in the direction (2, 2, 4) = (2, 4, 2) lifts
to two faces of ˜X ⊂S2 × S4 × S4, one in direction (2, 2, 4) and one in direction (2, 4, 2). So we see
that the projection of ˜X1 onto X is a degree 1 map.
But it’s easy to check that ˜X1 is null-homologous in Si × Sn × Sn. Since ˜X1 has dimension 2n,
and i < n, ˜X1 could be homologically non-trivial only if its projection to Sn × Sn had non-zero


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
25
degree. But ˜X1 is a (2n)-cycle with no volume in the (0, n, n) direction - so its projection to Sn×Sn
has measure zero.
□
The cycle X in the last proposition had no volume in the bad directions. Our actual cycle Z(F)
has a small but non-zero volume in the bad directions. The proposition does not directly apply to
Z(F), but one may still hope that Z(F) is rather similar to X. In the next two sections, we will
modify the above argument to show that Z(F) is homologically trivial.
The key point in the proof of Proposition 6.9 was that the double cover of X split into separate
cycles ˜X1 and ˜X2. The double cover of Z(F) will not literally split into two separate cycles. Instead,
the double cover will look like two large pieces joined by a thin bridge. We will have to prove a
suitable estimate about the shape of the bridge.
The estimate on the shape of the bridge involves fairly hard work. I made some attempt to ﬁnd a
softer argument. For example, I tried to ﬁnd a way to approximate the cycle Z(F) by a polyhedral
cycle X with no volume in the bad directions. But I couldn’t ﬁnd any way to do this. It’s still not
clear to me whether this fairly hard work is necessary...
In the next section, we formulate an inequality - called the perpendicular pair inequality - that
allows us to control the geometry of the thin bridge.
7. Perpendicular Pair Inequality
Perpendicular Pair Inequality. Suppose that z and w are mod 2 (n −1)-cycles in RN, and
suppose that y is an n-chain with ∂y = z + w. Finally, suppose that z and w are “perpendicular”
to each other in the following sense: for any coordinate (n −1)-tuple J, either VolJ(z) = 0 or
VolJ(w) = 0.
Then, we can ﬁnd a chain y′ with ∂y′ = z and with Hausdorﬀcontent HCn(y′) ≤C(n, N) Voln(y).
In addition, y′ lies in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≤C(n, N) Voln(y)1/n.
The directed volume VolJ(z) is deﬁned in Section 6.
It’s an open question whether we can bound the volume of y′ by C(n, N) Voln(y). A bound
on the Hausdorﬀcontent is weaker than a bound on the volume. For our application to k-dilation
estimates, this Hausdorﬀcontent estimate turns out to be just as useful as a volume estimate would
have been.
Here is an outline of this section. First we give a review of Hausdorﬀcontent. In particular, we
prove that a cycle with suﬃciently small Hausdorﬀcontent is homologically trivial. Next we give
the proof of our k-dilation lower bound using the perpendicualr pair inequality. At the end, we give
some more context for the perpendicular pair inequality by comparing it with an open problem in
geometric measure theory raised by L. C. Young in the early 60’s.
We prove the perpendicular pair inequality in the next section.
7.1. Review of Hausdorﬀcontent. Let E be a subset of Euclidean space RN or of some Rie-
mannian manifold. The Hausdorﬀcontents of E measure how diﬃcult it is to cover E with balls.
To compute the d-dimensional Hausdorﬀcontent of E, denoted HCd(E), we consider all covers of
E by (countably many) balls: E ⊂∪iB(xi, Ri). The “cost” associated to a given cover is P
i Rd
i .
The inﬁmal cost over all covers is the d-dimensional Hausdorﬀcontent of E.
In our case E will be an n-dimensional chain or cycle. The Hausdorﬀcontent obeys HCn(E) ≤
C(n) Voln(E), which one proves by covering E by small balls. On the other hand, the Hausdorﬀ
content of E may be much smaller than the volume, especially if E is “crumpled up” so that a
medium ball can cover a large volume of E.


26
LARRY GUTH
There is a version of the Federer-Fleming deformation theory using Hausdorﬀcontent in place
of volume. We need the following result:
Proposition 7.1. Let (M N, g) be a compact Riemannian manifold. For any dimension n ≤N,
there is a constant ǫ > 0, depending on M N, g, and n, such that every n-cycle z in M with
HCn(z) < ǫ is homologically trivial. (The proposition holds for homology with any coeﬃcients.)
Proof. The proof is based on the Federer-Fleming pushout lemma - adapted to Hausdorﬀcontent.
Lemma 7.2. Let ∆N denote a unit equilateral Euclidean simplex, and let E ⊂∆denote a set.
For each point p in the interior of ∆, let πp denote the outward radial projection from ∆−{p} to
∂∆. Let ∆1/2 ⊂∆denote a concentric simplex of one half the side-length, centered at the center
of mass of ∆. For any dimension 0 ≤d ≤N, the following inequality holds
Averagep∈∆1/2 HCd[πp(E \ {p})] ≤C(N) HCd(E).
Also, if HCd(E) is suﬃciently small, then we can choose p outside of E so that
HCd[πp(E)] ≤C(N) HCd(E).
Proof. If d > N −1, then HCd(∂∆) = 0, and the inequality is trivially true. So we can assume
d ≤N −1.
Let {B(xi, Ri)} denote any cover of E with balls. Let p ∈∆1/2. Consider a ball B(x, R) and
deﬁne the radius R′ = C(N) Dist(p, x)−1R.
We claim that if C(N) is large enough, then the
outward projection πp[B(x, R) \ {p}] is contained in B(πp(x), R′).
First we consider the case that Dist(p, x) ≤10R. In this case, R′ > 1, and so B(x′, R′) contains
∂∆⊃πp[B(x, R) \ {p}]. So we can now suppose that Dist(p, x) > 10R.
Let y ∈B(x, R) σ ⊂B(x, R) be a segment from x to y. Then πp(σ) is a (piecewise smooth)
curve in ∂∆from πp(x) to πp(y). We will prove that the length of πp(σ) is ≤R′. Suppose that z
and z′ are on σ and that πp(z) and πp(z′) lie in the same (N −1)-face F ⊂∂∆N. It suﬃces to
prove that Dist(πp(z), πp(z′)) ≲Dist(p, x)−1 Dist(z, z′).
Consider the triangle T with vertices p, πp(z), and πp(z′). The angle of T at the vertex p is the
angle between the rays [p, z] and [p, z′]. Because z, z′ ∈B(x, R) and Dist(p, x) ≥10R this angle is
≲Dist(p, x)−1 Dist(z, z′). The lengths of all sides of T are ≲1. Because p ∈∆1/2 the segments
[p, πp(z)] and [p, πp(z′)] hit the face F at an angle ≳1. Therefore, the other two angles of T are
each ≳1. It now follows by trigonometry that the length of [πp(z), πp(z′)] is at most a constant
factor times the angle at the vertex p. This proves the desired bound.
Now let B(x, R) be a ball, and let R′ = C(N) Dist(x, p)−1R, as above. Since d ≤N −1,
Averagep∈∆1/2(R′)d = Averagep∈∆1/2 C(N)Rd Dist(x, p)−d ≲Rd.
Consider a covering of E by balls B(xi, Ri). This inequality holds for each ball B(xi, Ri) in the
covering. Therefore, the average value of P
i(R′
i)d is ≤C(N) P
i Rd
i . And so the average value of
HCd[πp(E \ {p})] is bounded by C′(N) HCd(E).
If d ≤N and HCd(E) is suﬃciently small, then the measure of E is less than half the measure
of ∆1/2. Therefore, we can choose p ∈∆1/2 \ E so that HCd(πp(E)) ≤C(N) HCd(E).
□
Now we prove the proposition. Pick a triangulation of (M N, g). The metric g restricted to each
simplex is L-bilipschitz to the unit equilateral Euclidean simplex, where L is a constant depending


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
27
on (M n, g). Let z ⊂M N be an n-cycle with HCn(z) < ǫ. We use the push-out lemma on each
N-face of M N to homotope z into the (N −1)-skeleton of M N. Then we use it again on each (N-1)-
face of M to push z into the (N-2)-skeleton, and so on, until z is pushed into the n-skeleton. Each
homotopy may increase the n-dimensional Hausdorﬀcontent by a constant factor, so we end with
a cycle of Hausdorﬀcontent < Cǫ. Now if ǫ is too small, this cycle does not cover any n-simplex of
(M N, g), and so it is null-homologous.
□
7.2. The proof of the k-dilation lower bound. We now give the proof of the k-dilation lower
bound using the perpendicular pair inequality. We will prove the perpendicular pair inequality in
the next section.
Steenrod squares and k-dilation. Let F be a C1 map from Sm to Sn. If the Steenrod-Hopf
invariant SH(F) is non-zero, and k ≤(m + 1)/2, then Dilk(F) ≥c(m) > 0.
Proof. We recall the setup from Section 5.1. Let Z0 be any mod 2 chain in ΓiSm with boundary
Diag(Sm) + Bouquet(Sm). Then ΓiF(Z0) is essentially a cycle Z(F) in ΓiSn. According to Propo-
sition 5.4, the homology class of Z(F) determines SH(F). In particular, SH(F) = 0 if and only if
Z(F) is null-homologous.
We ﬁx k ≤(m + 1)/2. We may assume that Dilk(F) ≤ǫ = ǫ(m). If ǫ is suﬃciently small, we
have to show that SH(F) = 0. It suﬃces to show that Z(F) is null-homologous. In Section 6, we
proved some estimates about the directed volumes of Z(F). According to Lemma 6.7, if b, c ≥k,
then Vol(a,b,c)(Z(F)) ≲Dilk(F)2 ≲ǫ2. A direction (a, b, c) is called bad if |b −c| ≤1. According to
Lemma 6.8, Vol(a,b,c)(Z(F)) ≲Dilk(F)2 ≲ǫ2 for each bad direction.
Also we showed in Proposition 6.9 that if X is a polyhedral 2n-cycle in ΓiSn with zero volume
in the bad directions, then X is null-homologous. Our plan is to modify the proof of Proposition
6.9. The main issue is that Z(F) has a small but non-zero volume in the bad directions. We will
solve this main issue using the perpendicular pair inequality. A minor issue is that Z(F) is not a
polyhedral cycle. In order to set things up well, we have to slightly modify the deﬁnition of Z(F)
so it has something like a polyhedral structure. We begin by doing this small modiﬁcation.
Earlier, we didn’t think about how to choose Z0, but now let’s consider that point. We will choose
a triangulation of Sm and a Z2-invariant triangulation of Si. Taking the product of these, we get
a Z2-invariant polyhedral structure on Si × Sm × Sm, and taking the quotient gives a polyhedral
structure on ΓiSm.
Now it would be very convenient if we could choose Z0 to be a polyhedral chain with respect to
this polyhedral structure. But this is impossible, because Diag(Sm) is not a polyhedral cycle, and
∂Z0 needs to be Diag(Sm)+Bouquet(Sm). The best we can do is to write Z0 as a polyhedral chain
plus a small chain.
For any δ > 0, we do the following construction. We choose a polyhedral structure on ΓiSm as
above, using ﬁne triangulations of Si and Sm. (The ﬁne triangulation needs to depend on δ.) Then
we let Zδ be a 2n-chain with ∂Zδ = Diag(Sm)+Bouquet(Sm), obeying the following estimates. The
volume of Zδ is ≲1 (independent of δ). Most of Zδ is polyhedral with respect to our triangulation.
The remainder of Zδ has volume ≤δ. In other words, Zδ = Z′
δ + Z′′
δ where Z′
δ is polyhedral and
Z′′
δ has volume ≤δ. We can ﬁnd such a Zδ by taking a chain Z0 as above, choosing suﬃciently ﬁne
triangulations, and applying the deformation theorem.
As in Section 5.1, ΓiF(Zδ) is essentially a 2n-cycle in ΓiSn. More precisely, the boundary of
ΓiF(Zδ) lies in the lower-dimensional set Bouquet(Sn)∪Diag(Sn). Therefore, there is a 2n-chain νδ
in ΓiSn with volume zero and with ∂νδ = ∂[ΓiF(Zδ)]. We deﬁne Zδ(F) to be the sum ΓiF(Zδ)+νδ.
Now Zδ(F) is a 2n-cycle in ΓiSn. Because Zδ is a chain with boundary Bouquet(Sm) + Diag(Sm),


28
LARRY GUTH
Proposition 5.4 says that Zδ(F) is null-homologous if and only if SH(F) = 0. Assuming ǫ and δ are
suﬃciently small, we have to prove that Zδ(F) is null-homologous.
The point of this small modiﬁcation is that Zδ consists mostly of polyhedral faces, and polyhedral
faces are easier to analyze. Next we divide Zδ(F) into pieces in good and bad directions.
Recall that Zδ = Z′
δ + Z′′
δ , where Z′
δ is polyhedral and Z′′
δ has volume < δ. If Q = ∆a × ∆b × ∆c
is a polyhedral face of ΓiSm, we say that Q is good if |b −c| ≥2 and bad if |b −c| ≤1. (Here
∆a is a simplex in Si, and ∆b and ∆c are simplices in Sm.) We let Zδ(good) be the union of the
good faces in Z′
δ. We deﬁne G to be ΓiF(Zδ(good)). The chain G is the “good part” of Zδ(F). We
deﬁne B = Zδ(F) −G. So G and B are 2n-chains in ΓiSn with Zδ(F) = G + B.
Lemma 7.3. If ǫ and δ are suﬃciently small, then we can guarantee that Vol2n B is as small as
we like.
Proof. The chain B has a few pieces, but they are each easy to bound. We let Z′
δ(bad) be the union
of all bad faces in Z′
δ. Now B is equal to the following sum:
B = ΓiF(Z′
δ(bad)) + ΓiF(Z′′
δ ) + νδ.
The ﬁrst term is the most interesting. If Q is a face in Z′
δ(bad), then Q lies in direction (a, b, c)
with a + b + c = 2n and |b −c| ≤1. By Lemma 6.3, Vol ΓiF(Q) ≤Dilb(F) Dilc(F) Vol(Q). Since Q
is bad, Lemma 6.8 implies that b, c ≥k. Now since Dilk(F) ≤ǫ ≤1, we have Dilb(F) Dilc(F) ≤ǫ2.
Hence ΓiF(Z′
δ(bad)) has volume ≤ǫ2 Vol Z′
δ ≲ǫ2.
The volume of ΓiF(Z′′
δ ) ≤Dil1(F)2nδ. By making δ suﬃciently small, we can make this term as
small as we like.
Finally, νδ has volume zero.
□
So our cycle Zδ(F) has the form G + B, where G is a chain with volume only in the good
directions and B is small. Next we study the double cover of Zδ(F). To simplify the notation, we
abbreviate Zδ(F) by Z for the rest of the argument.
Now we consider the double cover ˜Z ⊂Si ×Sn ×Sn. We have ˜Z = ˜G+ ˜B, where ˜G is the double
cover of G and ˜B is the double cover of B.
If Q is a face in Z′
δ, then the double cover of Q in Si × Sm × Sm consists of two faces, ˜Q1 and
˜Q2. Each of these faces is a product of simplices. Suppose that ˜Q1 is a product ∆a1 × ∆b1 × ∆c1
with ∆a1 ⊂Si, ∆b1 in the ﬁrst copy of Sm, and ∆c1 in the second copy of Sm. Then the other
preimage face, ˜Q2, is I( ˜Q1), where I is our involution of Si × Sm × Sm. The face ˜Q1 is in direction
(a1, b1, c1), and the face ˜Q2 is in direction (a2, b2, c2) = (a1, c1, b1).
If Q is a good face then |b1 −c1| = |b2 −c2| ≥2. By choosing our labels appropriately, we can
assume that b1 ≤c1 −2 and b2 ≥c2 + 2.
The chain ˜G in Si × Sn × Sn is a sum of contributions from the good faces Q ⊂Z′
δ as follows:
˜G =
X
Q⊂Zδ,Q good
(id × F × F)( ˜Q1) + (id × F × F)( ˜Q2).
So we can divide ˜G into two pieces as follows.
˜G1 =
X
Q⊂Zδ,Q good
(id × F × F)( ˜Q1).


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
29
˜G2 =
X
Q⊂Zδ,Q good
(id × F × F)( ˜Q2).
Let us compare our situation with the situation in the proof of Proposition 6.9. In Proposition
6.9, we have a polyhedral 2n-cycle X in ΓiSn, with no volume in the bad directions. We consider
the double cover ˜X in Si × Sn × Sn, and we divide it into pieces ˜X = ˜X1 + ˜X2, where ˜X1 consists
of the faces in good directions (a, b, c) with b < c and ˜X2 consists of faces in the good directions
with c < b. The cycle Z is analogous to X. The chains ˜G1 and ˜G2 are analogous to ˜X1 and ˜X2.
The chain ˜G1 lies only in good directions (a, b, c) with b < c, and the chain ˜G2 lies only in good
directions (a, b, c) with c < b. But the situation is more complicated because Z has a small non-zero
volume in bad directions. So we have ˜Z = ˜G1 + ˜G2 + ˜B, and we know that ˜B has small volume.
In the proof of Proposition 6.9, the crucial point was that ˜X1 and ˜X2 were each cycles. In our
case, ˜G1 and ˜G2 are not cycles. Instead, I like to imagine ˜Z as two large pieces ( ˜G1 and ˜G2)
connected by a thin bridge ( ˜B). We would like to cut out ˜B and separately cap oﬀ˜G1. In other
words, we would like to ﬁnd a small chain Y1 so that ˜G1 + Y1 make a cycle. Then we can use this
cycle the way we used ˜X1 in the proof of Proposition 6.9.
This is the most delicate part of our argument. We already know that ˜B has small volume, but
this is not enough to be able to ﬁnd a small Y1. For example, imagine that ˜Z was a large sphere,
˜B was a small neighborhood of the equator, ˜G1 was the part of the Northern hemisphere to the
North of ˜B and ˜G2 was the part of the Southern hemisphere to the South of ˜B. Then ˜B may have
arbitrarily small volume, and yet the boundary of ˜G1 cannot be ﬁlled in with a small chain. In
order to ﬁnd a small cap Y1, we need more geometric information than just a bound on the volume
of ˜B.
The key point is that ∂˜G1 and ∂˜G2 are perpendicular, which allows us to apply the perpendicular
pair inequality. The perpendicular pair inequality exactly gives us the small chain Y1 that we need.
Here are the details. We consider Si × Sn × Sn ⊂Ri+1 × Rn+1 × Rn+1 = RN. So we can
think of ˜B, ∂˜G1, ∂˜G2, etc. as chains and cycles in RN. We have to check that ∂˜G1 and ∂˜G2 are
perpendicular in the sense deﬁned in the perpendicular pair inequality.
If J is a set of numbers from 1 to N, let a(J) denote the number of directions in J from the
ﬁrst factor Ri+1, let b(J) denote the number of directions of J from the second factor Rn+1, and
let c(J) denote the number of directions in J from the third factor Rn+1.
Lemma 7.4. If T0 is a d-chain in Si × Sm × Sm, and T = (id × F × F)(T0) ⊂RN = Ri+1 ×
Rn+1 × Rn+1, then
VolJ(T ) ≤Dilb(J)(F) Dilc(J)(F) Vol(a(J),b(J),c(J))(T0).
Proof. Consider the product structure RN = Ri+1 × Rn+1 × Rn+1. Using this product structure,
we can deﬁne Vol(a,b,c)(T ) for a d-chain T in RN.
The directed volume VolJ T ≤Vol(a(J),b(J),c(J))(T ), which follows by plugging in the deﬁnitions.
Applying Lemma 6.2, we see that
Vol(a(J),b(J),c(J))(T ) ≤Dilb(J)(F) Dilc(J)(F) Vol(a(J),b(J),c(J))(T0).
□
Lemma 7.5. Let ∆a × ∆b × ∆c be a face of our triangulation of Si × Sm × Sm. If VolJ(id × F ×
F)(∆a × ∆b × ∆c) > 0, then a(J) = a, b(J) = b, and c(J) = c.


30
LARRY GUTH
Proof. Note that Vol(a′,b′,c′)(∆a × ∆b × ∆c) > 0 only if (a′, b′, c′) = (a, b, c). Applying the previous
lemma ﬁnishes the argument.
□
The boundary of ˜G1 is the sum P
Q(id × F × F)(∂˜Q1), where the sum goes over all the good
faces Q ⊂Zδ. Pick a particular face ˜Q1, lying in direction (a1, b1, c1) with b1 ≤c1 −2. Suppose a
face of ∂˜Q1 has direction (¯a1,¯b1, ¯c1). The direction (¯a1,¯b1, ¯c1) is obtained by subtracting 1 from one
of the three entries in the vector (a1, b1, c1). Therefore, ¯b1 < ¯c1. So if VolJ(∂˜G1) > 0, then we must
have b(J) < c(J). But by the same argument, if VolJ(∂˜G2) > 0, then we must have b(J) > c(J).
For any (2n −1)-tuple J, either VolJ(∂˜G1) = 0 or VolJ(∂˜G2) = 0. So the two cycles ∂˜G1 and ∂˜G2
are perpendicular in the sense of the perpendicular pair inequality.
Now we can apply the perpendicular pair inequality. We let ∂˜G1 and ∂˜G2 play the roles of z
and w, and we let ˜B play the role of y. The hypotheses of the perpendicular pair inequality are
satisﬁed because ∂˜G1 and ∂˜G2 are perpendicular and ∂˜B = ∂˜G1 + ∂˜G2. Also note that Vol2n( ˜B)
is as small as we like. The perpendicular pair inequality tells us that there is a chain Y ⊂RN with
HC2n(Y ) as small as we like and ∂Y = ∂˜G1. The chain Y may not be contained in Si × Sn × Sn,
but it is contained in the R-neighborhood of Si × Sn × Sn for R ≲Vol2n( ˜B)
1
2n . Since R is tiny, we
may retract Y into Si × Sn × Sn without changing its Hausdorﬀcontent much. Hence there is a
mod 2 chain Y1 ⊂Si × Sn × Sn with HC2n(Y1) tiny and ∂Y1 = ∂˜G1.
Now we let ˜Z1 = Y1 + ˜G1. We note that ˜Z1 is a mod 2 (2n)-cycle in Si ×Sn ×Sn. We claim that
the cycle ˜Z1 is homologically trivial in Si × Sn × Sn. Since ˜Z1 is a (2n)-cycle, we just have to check
that its projection to Sn × Sn has degree zero. The projection of ˜G1 to Sn × Sn has measure zero,
because the direction (0, n, n) is a bad direction. On the other hand, Y1 has tiny (2n)-dimensional
Hausdorﬀcontent, so the projection of Y1 to Sn × Sn has tiny volume. Hence the projection of
˜Z1 to Sn × Sn is not surjective and has degree zero. So we see that ˜Z1 is homologically trivial in
Si × Sn × Sn.
Now let π : Si×Sn×Sn →ΓiSn be the double cover map. Clearly π( ˜Z1) is homologically trivial.
Now we break up the original cycle Zδ(F) = Z as a sum of cycles: Z = π( ˜Z1) +

Z −π( ˜Z1)

. The
ﬁrst summand is homologically trivial. Recall that Z = G+B. Now π( ˜Z1) = π( ˜G1+Y1) = G+π(Y1).
So Z−π( ˜Z1) = B−π(Y1). The chain B has tiny volume and the chain π(Y1) has tiny 2n-dimensional
Hausdorﬀcontent. Hence Z−π( ˜Z1) has tiny 2n-dimensional Hausdorﬀcontent. By Proposition 7.1,
it follows that Z −π( ˜Z1) is null-homologous. Therefore Z = Zδ(F) is null-homologous. Therefore
SH(F) = 0.
□
7.3. Context for the perpendicular pair inequality. The perpendicular pair question is similar
to a well-known open problem raised by L. C. Young in the 1960s. In [YL], Young constructed an
integral 1-cycle z in R4 with the following surprising property. There is an integral 2-chain y with
∂y = 2z and with area 2, but any integral chain y′ with ∂y′ = z has area strictly bigger than 1.
In fact, any integral chain y′ with ∂y′ = z has area > 1.3. Notice that y/2 is a real chain with
∂(y/2) = z and with mass 1. But in Young’s example, any integral chain y′ with ∂y′ = z has mass
> 1.3 > 1 = Mass(y/2).
Young raised the question of how large this eﬀect could be.
Young’s problem. Suppose that z is an integral (n−1)-cycle in RN. Suppose that y is an integral
n-chain with ∂y = 2z. Does it follow that there is another integral chain y′ with ∂y′ = z and
Mass(y′) ≤C(n, N) Mass(y)?


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
31
The perpendicular pair problem looks similar to Young’s problem. We can put them in a common
framework as follows. Suppose that ∂y = z −w. Can we ﬁnd a chain y′ with ∂y′ = z and with
the size of y′ comparable to the size of y? In general, the answer is certainly no. For example, we
may have z = w and y = 0. But if z and w are very diﬀerent from each other, it seems intuitive
that ﬁlling z and w separately may be approximately as good as ﬁlling z −w. In Young’s problem,
w = −z. In the perpendicular pair problem, we know that w and z are perpendicular. We can
formulate a version of Young’s problem for perpendicular pairs.
Perpendicular Pair Problem. Suppose that z and w are (integral or mod 2) (n −1)-cycles
in RN, and suppose that y is an n-chain with ∂y = z + w. Finally, suppose that z and w are
“perpendicular” to each other in the following sense: for any coordinate (n −1)-tuple J, either
VolJ(z) = 0 or VolJ(w) = 0.
Does it follow that there is a chain y′ with ∂y′ = z and Voln(y′) ≤C(n, N) Voln(y)?
It seems to me that these problems are closely related. Young’s problem is diﬃcult, and I believe
that the perpendicular pair problem is diﬃcult also.
8. Proof of the perpendicular pair inequality
In this section, we prove the perpendicular pair inequality. First we recall the statement.
Perpendicular Pair Inequality. Suppose that z and w are mod 2 (n −1)-cycles in RN, and
suppose that y is an n-chain with ∂y = z + w. Finally, suppose that z and w are “perpendicular”
to each other in the following sense: for any coordinate (n −1)-tuple J, either VolJ(z) = 0 or
VolJ(w) = 0.
Then, we can ﬁnd a chain y′ with ∂y′ = z and with HCn(y′) ≤C(n, N) Voln(y).
Also, y′ lies in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≤C(n, N) Voln(y)1/n.
This inequality can probably be extended to integral cycles or mod p cycles, but we only need
the mod 2 case. Focusing on mod 2 makes the exposition a little bit cleaner, because we don’t have
to keep track of signs.
8.1. The thick region. For any number α > 0, and any ball B = B(x, R) ⊂RN, we say that y is
α-thick in B if Vol(y ∩B) ≥αRn. Otherwise, we say that y is α-thin in B. Now the thick region
Tα(y) is deﬁned to be the union of all the balls B where y is α-thick.
A standard covering argument shows that Tα(y) has controlled Hausdorﬀcontent.
Lemma 8.1. For any α > 0,
HCn[Tα(y)] ≤5nα−1 Voln(y).
Proof. The set Tα(y) is the union of all thick balls. By the Vitali covering lemma, we can ﬁnd
disjoint thick balls Bi so that 5Bi covers Tα(y).
Hence HCn(Tα(y)) is bounded by P
i(5Ri)n,
where Ri denotes the radius of Bi. But since each Bi is α thick, Rn
i ≤α−1 Vol(y ∩Bi). Since the
Bi are disjoint, we see that P
i(5Ri)n ≤5nα−1 Vol(y).
□
8.2. Outline of the construction. Our construction is based on applying the deformation theo-
rem to z at a dyadic sequence of scales.
By a minor approximation argument, we can reduce to the case that z, w, and y are all cubical
chains in the cubical lattice with some tiny scale s0.
We give this approximation argument in


32
LARRY GUTH
Section 8.11.
For now, we give the proof of the perpendicular pair inequalities for the case of
cubical chains.
Then we consider a dyadic sequence of scales si = 2is0. We use the deformation theorem to
deform z to a cubical cycle at each scale. We let zi be a Federer-Fleming deformation of z at scale
si. (So z itself is z0.) Each cycle zi is a ﬁnite sum of cubical (n −1)-faces of the lattice with side
length si. We will prove that when i is suﬃciently large, zi is just the zero cycle. Let us deﬁne
ifinal so that zifinal = 0.
Next we build a sequence of n-chains Ai with ∂Ai = zi−1 −zi.
We deﬁne the chain y′ as
y′ = Pifinal
i=1
Ai. An easy calculation shows that ∂y′ = z0 −zifinal = z.
Our main goal is to do this construction in such a way that each zi and each Ai is contained
in Tα(y), for some α > 0 depending only on the dimension N. (This requires a slightly modiﬁed
version of the Federer-Fleming deformation theory adapted to the situation.) Then the Hausdorﬀ
content of y′ will be bounded by the Hausdorﬀcontent of Tα(y) ≲Voln(y).
This outline is based on arguments from [Y]. In [Y], R. Young uses a multiscale argument of
this type to prove isoperimetric inequalities on the Heisenberg group.
In this section we write A ≲B to mean A ≤C(N)B.
8.3. Intersection number lemma. In this section, we use the perpendicular hypothesis to bound
some intersection numbers.
Let R denote a rectangle of dimension N −n+1 parallel to the coordinate axes. If z is transverse
to R, then we can deﬁne the mod 2 intersection number [z ∩R] ∈Z2 as the number of points in
the intersection z ∩R taken modulo 2.
Intersection number lemma. Let α > 0 and s > 0 be any numbers. Let z and w be a perpen-
dicular pair of (n −1)-cycles. Let ∂y = z + w. Let R0 be an axis parallel rectangle with dimension
N −n + 1. Suppose that the sidelengths of R0 are at most s.
Let v be a vector of length at most s, and let Rv denote the translation of R0 by v. We will pick a
possible translation vector v ∈BN(s) randomly (with respect to the usual volume form on the ball).
Suppose that the ball around the center of R0 with radius Ns is α-thin. Then the intersection
number [z ∩Rv] is equal to 0 most of the time. More precisely, the set of vectors v ∈BN(s) so that
[z ∩Rv] ̸= 0 has probability measure at most C(n, N)α.
Proof. The intersection number [(z + w) ∩Rv] is equal to the intersection number [y ∩∂Rv]. The
boundary ∂Rv consists of 2N−n+1 faces, which are each rectangles contained in the ball of radius
Ns around the center of R0. Since y is small, it is usually disjoint from all these faces. By standard
integral geometry, the probability that y intersects any of the faces of ∂Rv is ≤C(n, N)α.
Here are details of the integral geometry argument. Let F denote a face of the boundary of R0.
Let Fv denote the translation of F by v, which is a face of the boundary of Rv. Let F ⊥denote
the plane perpendicular to F and let π denote the orthogonal projection from RN to F ⊥. The
projection π(Fv) is a single point. Let B denote the ball of radius Ns around the center of R0. All
faces Fv are contained in this ball. By assumption, the volume of y ∩B is at most C(n, N)αsn.
Therefore, the projection π(y ∩B) has volume at most C(n, N)αsn. Now if y intersects Fv, then
the point π(Fv) must lie in π(y ∩B). We note that π(Fv) is just π(F) + π(v). So Fv intersects y
only if π(v) is contained in the small set π(y ∩B) −π(F). The set of v obeying this condition has
probability at most C(n, N)α.
With high probability, 0 = [y∩∂Rv] = [(z+w)∩Rv] = [z∩Rv]+[w∩Rv]. But the two intersection
numbers [z ∩Rv] and [w ∩Rv] can (almost) never cancel because z and w are perpendicular cycles.
Let J denote the n −1 coordinates that are perpendicular to R0. Note that if VolJ(z) = 0, then


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
33
z is disjoint from Rv for almost every v. By the perpendicularity assumption, we know that either
VolJ(z) = 0 or VolJ(w) = 0. Hence either [z ∩Rv] = 0 for almost every v or else [w ∩Rv] = 0 for
almost every v.
Therefore, [z ∩Rv] = 0 except with probability C(n, N)α.
□
8.4. The deformation operator. In this section, we review the Federer-Fleming deformation
operator. The deformation operator is deﬁned in terms of intersection numbers. Therefore, the
intersection number lemma will allow us to prove estimates about the deformations of z.
The Federer-Fleming construction is based on the skeleta of lattices and their dual skeleta. Let
Σ(s) be the cubical lattice at scale s in RN. We let Σd(s) be the d-skeleton of Σ(s).
Let ¯Σ(s) be the dual cubical lattice. Here dual means that each vertex of ¯Σ is the center of an
N-face of Σ, while each vertex of Σ is the center of an N-face of ¯Σ. Each edge of ¯Σ passes through
the center point of a unique (N-1)-face of Σ etc. For any d-dimensional face F d ⊂Σd, we let ¯F N−d
denote the corresponding (N-d)-dimensional face of the dual skeleton ¯ΣN−d. Note that F and ¯F
always have the same center point.
For a vector v, we let ¯Σv denote the translation of ¯Σ by v. If F is a d-face of Σd and ¯F is the
corresponding face of ¯Σ, we let ¯Fv denote the translation of ¯F by the vector v.
With these two skeleta set up, we can deﬁne the Federer-Fleming deformation operator. For each
v, the deformation operator takes any d-chain T transverse to ¯Σv, and outputs Dv(T ) a cubical
d-chain contained in Σd. The deformation operator is deﬁned as follows:
Dv(T ) :=
X
F d⊂Σd
[ ¯F N−d
v
∩T ]F.
Recall that [ ¯Fv ∩T ] ∈Z2 is the topological intersection number of ¯Fv and T .
The deformation Dv(T ) depends on the scale s. I think it would clutter the notation too much
to write something like Ds
v(T ). It will always be clear from the context which scale s is being used.
We now recall some standard facts about the deformation operator. We review the proofs of the
standard facts in Section 14.4.
1. If |v| < s/2, and if T is a cubical d-chain in Σ(s), then Dv(T ) = T .
2. The deformation operator commutes with taking boundaries:
Dv(∂T ) = ∂Dv(T ).
(provided that ¯Σv is transverse to both ∂T and T so that both sides of the equation are deﬁned.)
3. If we average over all |v| < s/2, then
Averagev Vold[Dv(T )] ≤C(d, N) Vold(T ).
4. If T is a d-cycle, then we can build a (d+1)-chain Av(T ) in the C(N)s neighborhood of T
with ∂Av(T ) = T −Dv(T ). Moreover, if we average over all |v| < s/2, then
Averagev Vold+1[Av(T )] ≤C(d, N)s Vold(T ).
The intersection number lemma gives some estimates about the cycle Dv(z).
Lemma 8.2. Let α > 0 be any number. Let F be a face of Σ(s). Suppose that F is not contained
in Tα(y). Then, as we consider all |v| < s/2, the probability that F is contained in Dv(z) is at most
C(n, N)α.


34
LARRY GUTH
Proof. The face F is contained in Dv(z) if and only if the intersection number [ ¯Fv ∩z] is non-zero.
Since F is not contained in Tα(y), it follows that the ball around the center of F with radius Ns
is α-thin. The center of F is the same as the center of ¯F, so the ball around the center of ¯F with
radius Ns is α-thin. Now we apply the intersection number lemma with ¯F playing the role of the
rectangle R0. The intersection number lemma implies that the probability that [ ¯Fv ∩z] ̸= 0 is at
most C(n, N)α.
□
It would have been helpful if Dv(z) were completely contained in Tα(y) for some dimensional
constant α(N) > 0. We could then choose s = si and deﬁne zi = Dv(z), and we would know that
zi ⊂Tα(y) for each i, accomplishing a big chunk of the plan laid out in the outline. Unfortunately,
Lemma 8.2 is not strong enough to imply this.
The problem is that just translating the lattice ¯Σ does not give us enough degrees of freedom to
ﬁnd a deformation Dv(z) with all the properties that we would like. We will improve the situation
by moving each vertex of ¯Σ(s) independently. This will involve not just translating ¯Σ but bending
it.
8.5. Federer-Fleming deformations using bent dual skeleta. Let Φ : ¯Σ(s) →Rn be a PL
or piecewise smooth map. We call Φ a “bending” of the dual skeleton. The deformation operator
associated to Φ is a small modiﬁcation of the standard deformation operator.
DΦ(T ) :=
X
F d⊂Σd(s)
[Φ( ¯F) ∩T ]F.
Notice that DΦ(T ) is a cubical chain in Σd(s) - we do not bend or translate Σ(s). The deformation
operator DΦ is deﬁned as long as T is transverse to Φ(¯Σ).
Our next goal is to construct bending functions Φi : ¯Σ(si) →RN in such a way that the
deformations DΦi(z) = zi are contained in the thick region Tα(y). This will take some work. We
record here an important property of the deformation operator DΦ.
Lemma 8.3. The deformation operator DΦ commutes with boundaries. In other words, if T is any
d-chain, and Φ is transverse to both T and ∂T , then
∂DΦ(T ) = DΦ(∂T ).
Proof. From the formula for D(T ), we see that
∂D(T ) =
X
F d⊂Σd(s)
[Φ( ¯F ) ∩T ]∂F.
Consider a (d-1)-face G in Σd−1. Let F1(G), ..., F2(N−d+1)(G) be the set of all the d-faces of
Σd(s) that contain G in their boundary. We can rewrite the formula for ∂D(T ) as follows:
∂D(T ) =
X
Gd−1⊂Σd−1(s)


2(N−d+1)
X
j=1
[Φ(Fj(G)) ∩T ]

G.
Now the ﬁrst key point is that P2(N−d+1)
j=1
Fj(G) = ∂¯G. Therefore,
∂D(T ) =
X
Gd−1⊂Σd−1(s)
[Φ(∂¯G) ∩T ]G.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
35
Since Φ is transverse to T , Φ( ¯G) ∩T is a 1-chain, and the boundary of Φ( ¯G) ∩T consists of an
even number of points. By transversality, the boundary of Φ( ¯G) ∩T is the union of Φ(∂¯G) ∩T and
Φ( ¯G) ∩∂T . Therefore, [Φ(∂¯G) ∩T ] = [Φ( ¯G) ∩∂T ]. Substituting in, we get
∂D(T ) =
X
Gd−1⊂Σd−1(s)
[Φ( ¯G) ∩∂T ]G = D(∂T ).
□
We have to construct useful bending maps Φi : ¯Σ(si) →RN. If a face F is not in the thick region
Tα(y), then we want [Φi( ¯F)∩z] to vanish. We will prove this vanishing using the intersection number
lemma. To make this approach work, we need Φi( ¯F) to be a union of axis-parallel rectangles, with
some translation freedom. We set up a framework for this in the next subsection.
8.6. Local grids and bending maps. We can think of the cubical lattice at scale s as the union
of hyperplanes
{xj = sm}, j = 1, ..., N, m ∈Z.
We deﬁne a grid to be a union of coordinate hyperplanes (which may not be evenly spaced). For
example, if hj(m) are real numbers with hj(m) < hj(m + 1), then we can form a grid by taking the
union of all hyperplanes of the form {xj = hj(m)}, for j = 1, ..., N, and m ∈Z. Any grid can be
expressed in this way, for some appropriate numbers hj(m). We say that the spacing of the gird is
≤S if hj(m + 1) −hj(m) ≤S for every j, m.
For example, we can make a grid by translating the hyperplanes in the cubical lattice at scale
s. Given a perturbation function p(j, m) ∈[−1/4, 1/4], the corresponding perturbed grid is given
by the union of hyperplanes {xj = s(m + p(j, m))}, where again j = 1, ..., N, m ∈Z.
Since
|p(j, m)| ≤1/4, the spacing of this perturbed grid is ≤(3/2)s.
We can also take the union of two grids, just by taking the union of all of the hyperplanes. We
say that one grid is contained in a second grid if each hyperplane in the ﬁrst grid is contained in
the second grid.
We can think of a grid as a polyhedron, and talk about its vertices, its edges, its faces, and so
on.
Next we deﬁne a “local grid” for the complex ¯Σ(s). A local grid is a function G that assigns a
grid to each face f (of any dimension) in ¯Σ(s) in such a way that if f1 ⊂f2, then G(f1) ⊂G(f2). In
particular, if v1, ..., v2d are the vertices of a d-dimensional face f ⊂¯Σ(s), then G(f) must contain
∪2d
i=1G(vi). We say that a local grid G has spacing ≤S if each grid G(f) has spacing ≤S.
For any local grid, we can deﬁne a bending function Φ that behaves nicely with respect to the
grid.
Lemma 8.4. Let G be a local grid for ¯Σ(s) with spacing ≤S. Then there is a function Φ : ¯Σ(s) →
RN with the following properties. For each d-dimensional face f of ¯Σ(s), Φ(f) is contained in the
d-skeleton of G(f). Moreover, as a chain, Φ(f) is equal to a sum of d-faces of G(f).
Also, for any point x, |Φ(x) −x| ≤2N 2S.
Proof. We deﬁne Φ one skeleton at a time. First we deﬁne Φ on the vertices of ¯Σ(s). Let v be a
vertex of ¯Σ(s). Since the spacing of G(v) is ≤S, we can choose a point Φ(v) with |Φ(v) −v| ≤Ns,
by pushing v to the nearest vertex in G(v). Now we will deﬁne Φ on higher-dimensional skeleta so
that for each x in the d-skeleton, |Φ(x) −x| ≤(d + 1)NS.


36
LARRY GUTH
Suppose we have deﬁned Φ on the (d-1)-skeleton of ¯Σ(s).
We have to deﬁne Φ on a d-face
f ⊂¯Σ(s). We have already deﬁned Φ on ∂f. For each face fi of ∂f, we know that Φ maps fi
into the (d-1)-skeleton of G(fi). Since G is a local grid, the (d-1)-skeleton of G(fi) is contained
in the (d-1)-skeleton of G(f). Therefore, Φ maps ∂f into the (d-1)-skeleton of G(f). So we can
extend Φ to f, mapping f into the d-skeleton of G(f). As a chain, Φ(f) will be equal to a sum of
d-faces of G(f). By induction, we can assume that |Φ(x) −x| ≤dNS for each x ∈∂f. It’s then
straightforward to arrange that |Φ(x) −x| ≤dNS + NS for each x ∈f.
□
8.7. Good local grids. Next we will construct a good local grid Gi at each scale si. The good
feature of the local grid is that its faces don’t intersect z unnecessarily.
Lemma 8.5. For each scale i ≥1 and each vertex v ∈¯Σ(si), we will construct a grid Gi(v) with
spacing ≤(1/100)N −2si.
For any face f in ¯Σ(si), we deﬁne Gi(f) to be ∪v∈fGi(v).
We will also need some grids related to two consecutive scales, si−1 and si. If v is a vertex of
¯Σ(si), deﬁne Gi−1,i(v) to be the union of Gi(v) and Gi−1(w), for all the vertices w ∈¯Σ(si−1) which
lie within Nsi of v. If f is a face of ¯Σ(si), we deﬁne Gi−1,i(f) to be the union of Gi−1,i(v) over
all vertices v ∈f.
There exists a constant β = β(N) > 0 so that the following holds.
If R is an (N −n + 1)-face of Gi(f) or Gi−1,i(f), and if R lies in the 4N 2si-neighborhood of f,
then R will be transverse to z and it will obey the following key estimate. Let Ball[R] be the ball
centered at the center of R and with radius Nsi.
• If [z ∩R] ̸= 0, then Voln(y ∩Ball[R]) ≥βsn
i .
Here is the heuristic explanation. If Voln(y ∩Ball[R]) is very small, then the intersection number
lemma implies that a small random perturbation of R will usually give [z ∩R] = 0. So by wiggling
all the local grids a little bit, we can arrange the key estimate at the end of the lemma.
The proof of the good local grids lemma is probabilistic, and it depends on the following proba-
bility lemma.
Lemma 8.6. Suppose that X = Q∞
i=1 Xi is a product of probability spaces. Suppose that Bad ⊂X
is a union Bad = ∪Badα. Suppose that each set Badα has probability less than ǫ. Suppose that
each set Badα depends on < C1 diﬀerent coordinates xi of the point x ∈X. Suppose that each
variable xi is relevant for < C2 diﬀerent sets Badα. If ǫ < (1/2)C−C1
2
, then Bad is not all of X.
See the appendix in Section 14.1 for a proof of this lemma and also some more discussion. Using
the probability lemma, we now prove our lemma on the existence of good local grids.
Proof. For each i and for each vertex v in ¯Σ(si), we will choose a perturbation function pi,v(j, m) ∈
[−1/4, 1/4], where j = 1, ..., N and m ∈Z. Then we deﬁne Gi(v) to be the union of the hyperplanes
xj = (1/200)N −2si(m + pi,v(j, m)). The spacing of each Gi(v) is ≤(1/100)N −2si.
We are going to apply the probability lemma. The space X is the set of choices of pi,v(j, m) ∈
[−1/4, 1/4], where i ≥0, v is a vertex in ¯Σ(si), j = 1, ..., N, and m ∈Z. This is a product space
over the index set (i, v, j, m), and for each factor we put the uniform probability distribution on
[−1/4, 1/4].
For almost all choices of pi,v(j, m), the (N −n + 1) skeleton of each grid Gi(f) or Gi−1,i(f) is
transverse to z.
Now we turn to the key estimate at the end of the lemma. We enumerate the diﬀerent ways that
this key estimate may fail.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
37
Let us say that our choice of pi,v(j, m) lies in Badi(f) if f is a face of ¯Σ(si), and R is an (N-n+1)-
face of Gi(f), lying in the 4N 2si-neighborhood of f, and [z ∩R] = 1, and Voln(y ∩Ball[R]) < βsn
i .
Deﬁne Badi−1,i(f) in the same way, using the grid Gi−1,i(f).
We claim that each set Badi(f) or Badi−1,i(f) depends on C1 ≲1 parameters pi,v(j, m). There
are only one or two choices for i. The vertex v needs to belong to f, or at least to lie within Nsi
of a vertex of f, so there are only ≲1 choices of vertex v. There are only N ≲1 choices of j in
any case. Since the face R needs to lie in the 4N 2si-neighborhood of f, we only need to consider
values of m where the plane xj = simj lies within C(N)si of the face f, and so there are only ≲1
choices for m.
We also claim that each variable pi,v(j, m) is only relevant for C2 ≲1 bad sets Badi(f) or
Badi−1,i(f). In fact, if pi,v(j, m) is relevant for Badi′(f) or Badi′−1,i′(f), then we must have i′ = i
or i + 1, and f must have a vertex lying near v. This leaves ≲1 choices for f.
Finally, we have to check that the probability of each set Badi(f) or Badi−1,i(f) is ≲β. Then
if we choose β suﬃciently small, the probability lemma will guarantee that there exists a choice of
parameters which is not bad, and we will be done.
So let us consider the probability of Badi(f) (or Badi−1,i(f)). There are ≲1 faces R which could
potentially violate the key estimate. Each of the faces R that we must consider is positioned by
the choice of parameters pi,v(j, m) and maybe pi−1,v(j, m) for vertices v near to f and for a certain
range of m. Varying the parameters randomly essentially amounts to translating R at random.
The intersection number lemma says that if y ∩Ball[R0] has volume < βsn
i , then the probability
that [z ∩R] ̸= 0 is ≲β. So the probability that R violates the key estimate is ≲β.
□
We now ﬁx the local grids Gi and Gi−1,i and the constant β = β(N) > 0 for the rest of the
proof.
8.8. The bending maps Φi and the cycles zi. Using the good local grid lemma, we can now
construct the bending maps Φi and deﬁne the cycles zi.
Using Lemma 8.4, we deﬁne Φi to be a bending map with respect to the local grid Gi, and we
ﬁx Φi for the rest of the proof. We deﬁne zi to be DΦi(z).
The grids Gi have spacing Si ≤(1/100)N −2si. By Lemma 8.4, the maps Φi obey |Φi(x) −x| ≤
2N 2Si ≤(1/50)si.
Lemma 8.7. The cycle zi lies in Tα(y) for α ≳1. Moreover, if a face F ⊂Σ(si) belongs to zi,
then there is a ball around the center of F with radius ∼si and thickness ≳1.
Proof. For each face F ⊂Σ(si), Φi( ¯F) is equal to a sum of (N-n-1)-faces from Gi( ¯F). We know
that Φi displaces points at most (1/50)si. Therefore, each of these faces lies within the (1/50)si-
neighborhood of ¯F.
If F is contained in zi, then [Φi( ¯F) ∩z] = 1. Therefore, [R ∩z] = 1 for an (N-n-1)-face R in
Gi( ¯F), lying within the (1/50)si -neighborhood of ¯F.
By Lemma 8.5, it follows that Voln(y ∩Ball[R]) ≥βsn
i , where Ball[R] denotes the ball around
the center of R and with radius Nsi. The ball Ball[R] contains F, and so F lies in Tα(y) for some
α ≳β ≳1.
Also, the ball around the center of F with radius 3N 2si contains Ball[R], and this ball has
thickness ≳β ≳1.
□
Lemma 8.8. There is a constant C(N) so that if zi is non-zero, then si ≤C(N) Voln(y)1/n.


38
LARRY GUTH
Proof. If zi contains a face F, then the last lemma says that there is a ball of radius ∼si with
thickness ≳1. The total volume of y is at least the volume of y in this ball, which is ≳sn
i .
□
At this point, we deﬁne ifinal to be the smallest i so that si > C(N) Voln(y)1/n, which guarantees
that zifinal = 0. We have si ≲Voln(y)1/n for all i ≤ifinal.
Lemma 8.9. Each cycle zi lies in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≲Voln(y)1/n.
Proof. Suppose that zi contains a face F. Then Φi( ¯F) must intersect z. But Φi displaces points
by at most ≲si. Therefore, the face F is contained in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≲si ≲
Voln(y)1/n.
□
Lemma 8.10. The cycle z0 is equal to z.
Proof. If F, G are (n −1)-faces of Σ(s0), we have to check that [Φ0( ¯F ) ∩G] is 1 if F = G and
zero otherwise. This is clearly true if Φ0 is the identity. Now Φ0 displaces each point by at most
(1/50)s0. The boundary of ¯F is at a distance at least (1/2)s0 from Σn−1(s0). So the straightline
homotopy from the identity to Φ0 will never map ∂( ¯F) into any G, and the intersection numbers
will not change.
□
To ﬁnish the proof of the perpendicular pair inequality, we have to construct n-chains Ai ⊂Tα(y)
with ∂Ai = zi−1 −zi.
8.9. Homologies between deformations at diﬀerent scales. Now we have a deformation
Di = DΦi based on the bending map Φi : ¯Σ(si) →RN. The deformation operator Di deforms
chains/cycles into cubical chains/cycles inside Σ(si). In particular, Diz = zi is a cubical cycle,
and we know that each zi lies in Tα(y). Next, we have to construct homologies Ai from zi−1 to
zi also lying in Tα(y). The cycles zi−1 and zi are cycles at diﬀerent scales: zi−1 is a cubical cycle
in Σ(si−1) and zi is a cubical cycle in Σ(si). In this section, we construct a cycle z+
i−1 at scale si
and a homology from zi−1 to z+
i−1. In the next section, we do the harder work of constructing a
homology from z+
i−1 to zi.
We let v = (si−1/2, ..., si−1/2). We now deﬁne z+
i−1 using the standard deformation operator for
Σ(s):
z+
i−1 = Dv(zi−1) =
X
F ⊂Σn−1(si)
[ ¯Fv ∩zi−1]F.
(One reason for translating by v is as follows. If F ∈Σn−1(si) and ¯F is the corresponding face
of ¯ΣN−n+1(si), then ¯F is not transverse to Σ(si−1), and so ¯F is not transverse to zi−1. But ¯Fv
is transverse to Σ(s −1), and so z+
i−1 is deﬁned. Other reasons of our speciﬁc choice of v appear
below.)
The cycle z+
i−1 lies in the C(N)si−1-neighborhood of zi−1. Also, by the standard properties of
the deformation operator, there is a homology A′
i from zi−1 to z+
i−1 in the C(N)si−1-neighborhood
of zi−1. (See Section 14.4 for a review of the proof.) The following lemma shows that A′
i lies in
Tα(y).
Lemma 8.11. The C(N)si−1 neighborhood of zi−1 lies in Tα(y) for α ≳1.
Proof. From Lemma 8.7, we know that if F is a face of Σ(si−1) which is contained in zi−1, then
there is a ball around the center of F with radius ∼si−1 and thickness ≳1. Therefore, the ball of
radius C(N)si−1 around any point of zi has thickness ≳1.
□


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
39
Lemma 8.12. The chain A′
i lies in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≲Voln(y)1/n.
Proof. We know that A′ lies in the C(N)si neighborhood of zi. By Lemma 8.8, si ≲Voln(y)1/n.
By Lemma 8.9 zi lies in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≲Voln(y)1/n.
□
The main diﬃculty is to build a homology A′′
i from z+
i−1 to zi. To facilitate this, it helps to
describe z+
i−1 and zi in similar ways. Recall that zi = DΦi(z).
We will now construct a map
Φ+
i−1 : ¯Σ(si) →RN, and show that z+
i−1 is DΦ+
i−1(z).
The map Φ+
i−1 is deﬁned in terms of Φi−1 by
Φ+
i−1(x) = Φi−1(x + v).
Lemma 8.13. The chain z+
i−1 is equal to DΦ+
i−1(z).
Proof. By deﬁnition,
z+
i−1 =
X
F ⊂Σn−1(si)
[ ¯Fv ∩zi−1]F.
Now zi−1 = DΦi−1z = P
H⊂Σn−1(si−1)[Φi−1( ¯H) ∩z]H.
When we plug the deﬁnition of zi−1 into the formula for z+
i−1, we see that the coeﬃcient of F in
z+
i−1 is
X
H⊂Σn−1(si−1)
[Φi−1( ¯H) ∩z][ ¯Fv ∩H].
We let H(F) be the set of (n −1)-faces H in Σn−1(si−1) so that [ ¯Fv ∩H] = 1. Next we check
that P
H∈H(F ) ¯H = ¯Fv. (It may be helpful to draw a picture here.) Recall that ¯F is an (N-n+1)-
dimensional face in ¯Σ(si). The translated face ¯Fv lies in the (N-n+1)-skeleton of ¯Σ(si−1). The face
¯Fv is a sum of 2N−n+1 faces of ¯ΣN−n+1(si−1). We call these faces ¯J1, ..., ¯J2N−n+1, where the Ji
are (n −1)-faces in Σ(si−1). Now if H and J are any two faces in Σn−1(si), then the intersection
number [ ¯J ∩H] is equal to 1 if H = J and 0 otherwise. Therefore, [ ¯Fv ∩H] = 1 if H is one of
the faces J1, ..., J2N−n+1 and 0 otherwise. In other words, H(F) is exactly J1, ..., J2N−n+1. Now
P
H∈H(F ) ¯H = P
i ¯Ji = ¯Fv.
Using this information, we see that the coeﬃcient of F in z+
i−1 is
X
H∈H(F )
[Φi−1( ¯H) ∩z] = [Φi−1( ¯Fv) ∩z] = [Φ+
i−1( ¯F) ∩z].
Therefore, z+
i−1 = P
F ⊂Σn−1(si)[Φ+
i−1( ¯F) ∩z]F = DΦ+
i−1(z).
□
The map Φ+
i−1 has good properties analogous to the map Φi. We state this as a lemma.
Lemma 8.14. For each d-dimensional face f of ¯Σ(si), Φ+
i−1(f) is contained in the d-skeleton of
Gi−1,i(f). Moreover, as a chain, Φ+
i−1(f) is equal to a sum of d-faces of Gi−1,i(f).
Also, for any point x, |Φ+
i−1(x) −x| ≤Nsi.


40
LARRY GUTH
Proof. Recall that v = (si−1/2, ..., si−1/2). Now Φ+
i−1(f) = Φi−1(f + v). As we saw in the proof of
the last lemma, f + v is a sum of 2d d-faces in ¯Σ(si−1), f + v = P hj. Now Φi−1(hj) lies in the
d-skeleton of the grid Gi−1(hj) ⊂Gi−1,i(f). Therefore, Φ+
i−1(f) lies in the d-skeleton of Gi−1,i(f).
As a chain, Gi−1(hj) is a sum of faces of Gi−1(hj) - and each of these faces is a sum of d-faces of
Gi−1,i(f). Therefore, Φ+
i−1(f) is a sum of d-faces of Gi−1,i(f). Finally, |Φi−1(x)−x| ≤(1/50)si−1 =
(1/100)si. Now |Φ+
i−1(x) −x| = |Φi−1(x + v) −x| ≤|v| + |Φi−1(x + v) −(x + v)| ≤(1/100)si + |v| =
(1/100)si + (1/4)N 1/2si.
□
8.10. Homologies between diﬀerent deformations at the same scale. Let Φ1 and Φ2 be
two ways of bending the dual skeleton ¯Σ(s). Let D1 and D2 be the corresponding deformation
operators. If we have a homotopy from Φ1 to Φ2, we will use it to deﬁne a “homotopy” between
the deformation operators Φi.
Suppose that Φ1,2 : ¯Σ × [1, 2] →RN is a homotopy from Φ1 to Φ2. We deﬁne the operator D1,2
in terms of Φ1,2 as follows. Let T be a d-dimensional chain in RN transverse to all Φ maps.
D1,2(T ) :=
X
Gd+1⊂Σd+1
[Φ1,2( ¯G × [1, 2]) ∩T ]G.
Notice that if T is a d-chain, then D1,2(T ) is a (d+1)-chain.
The key formula about D1,2 is the following.
Lemma 8.15. The operator D1,2 obeys the following algebraic identity:
∂D1,2(T ) = D1(T ) + D2(T ) + D1,2(∂T ).
In particular, if z is a cycle, then ∂D1,2(z) = D1(z) + D2(z).
Proof. This proof is similar to the proof that a deformation operator D commutes with boundaries.
The left-hand side is
∂D1,2(T ) =
X
G⊂Σd+1
[Φ1,2( ¯G × [1, 2]) ∩T ]∂G.
Now for each d-face F in Σd(s), we let G1(F), ..., G2(N−d)(F) be the (d+1)-faces having F in
their boundaries. So the last equation may be rewritten as
X
F ⊂Σd
2N−2d
X
j=1
[Φ1,2(Gj(F) × [1, 2]) ∩T ]F.
The ﬁrst point is that P
j Gj(F) = ∂¯F. So our last equation may be rewritten as
∂D1,2(T ) =
X
F ⊂Σd
[Φ1,2(∂¯F × [1, 2]) ∩T ]F.
(∗)
Next, ∂¯F × [1, 2] = ∂( ¯F × [1, 2]) + ¯F × {1} + ¯F × {2}. Plugging this formula in, we see that
[Φ1,2(∂¯F × [1, 2]) ∩T ] = [Φ1( ¯F) ∩T ] + [Φ2( ¯F) ∩T ] + [∂Φ1,2( ¯F × [1, 2]) ∩T ].
Next we rearrange the last term in this equation. By transversality, Φ1,2( ¯F ×[1, 2])∩T is a 1-chain
with an even number of boundary points. Therefore, [∂Φ1,2( ¯F ×[1, 2])∩T ] = [Φ1,2( ¯F ×[1, 2])∩∂T ].
Using this substitution, we see


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
41
[Φ1,2(∂¯F × [1, 2]) ∩T ] = [Φ1( ¯F ) ∩T ] + [Φ2( ¯F) ∩T ] + [Φ1,2( ¯F × [1, 2]) ∩∂T ].
Putting this formula for the intersection number back into equation (∗), we see that ∂D1,2T =
D1(T ) + D2(T ) + D1,2(∂T ).
□
In our setting, we need to build a homology from z+
i−1 = DΦ+
i−1(z) to zi = DΦi(z). Here Φ+
i−1
and Φi are both maps deﬁned on ¯Σsi. To get a homology from z+
i−1 to zi we need a homotopy from
Φ+
i−1 to Φi. We will build this homotopy by the same local grid method that we used to build Φi
in the ﬁrst place.
We know that Φi and Φ+
i−1 each map each d-face f of ¯Σ(si) into the d-skeleton of Gi−1,i(f). We
extend to get a homotopy Φi−1,i : ¯Σ(si) × [1, 2] →RN which maps each d-face of ¯Σ(si) × [1, 2] into
the d-skeleton of Gi−1,i(f). Since Φi and Φ+
i−1 each have displacement ≤Nsi, we can arrange that
|Φi−1,i(x, t) −x| ≤33Nsi.
We deﬁne a homology A′′
i to be A′′
i = DΦi−1,i(z). Since z is a cycle and Φi−1,i is a homotopy
from Φ+
i−1 to Φi, ∂A′′
i = DΦ+
i−1(z) + DΦi(z) = z+
i−1 + zi.
Lemma 8.16. The chain A′′
i lies in Tα(y) for α ≳1.
Proof. Suppose that F ⊂Σd+1(si) is a (d+1)-face of A′′
i . By deﬁnition, we know that [Φi−1,i( ¯F ×
[1, 2]) ∩z] ̸= 0. But Φi−1,i( ¯F × [1, 2]) is a sum of (N-n-1)-faces of Gi−1,i( ¯F) all lying within a
4Nsi-neighborhood of F. For one of these faces, R, we must have [R ∩z] ̸= 0.
Recall that Ball[R] is the ball around the center of R with radius Nsi. By the good local grid
lemma, Lemma 8.5, it follows that Voln(y ∩Ball[R]) ≥βsn
i ≳sn
i . Therefore, there is a ball around
the center of F with radius ∼si and thickness ≳1. So F ⊂Tα(y) for some α ≳1.
□
Lemma 8.17. The chain A′′
i lies in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≲Voln(y)1/n.
Proof. If F is a face of A′′
i , then we see that Φi−1,1( ¯F × [1, 2]) must intersect z. Since |Φi−1,i(x, t)−
x| ≲si, we see that F must lie in the C(N)si-neighborhood of z. But since i ≤ifinal, si ≲
Voln(y)1/n.
□
Now Ai := A′
i + A′′
i is a homology from zi−1 to zi, contained in the thick region Tα(y). Also, Ai
is contained in the R-neighborhood of z for R ≲Voln(y)1/n.
This completes the proof of the perpendicular pair inequality for cubical cycles and chains z, w, y.
In the next subsection we explain how to reduce the general proposition to the case of cubical cycles
and chains.
8.11. Approximating by cubical cycles and chains. Let us recall the hypotheses of the per-
pendicular pair inequality. We have mod 2 (n −1)-cycles z and w, and a mod 2 n-chain y in RN.
We know that ∂y = z + w. We know that z and w are perpendicular in the sense that for any
coordinate (n −1)-tuple J, either VolJ(z) = 0 or VolJ(w) = 0.
We want to approximate these chains and cycles by some cubical chains and cycles ˜z, ˜w, and
˜y. For some tiny constant s0, we will choose ˜z and ˜w as cubical cycles in Σ(s0) and ˜y as a cubical
chain in Σ(s0). In order to preserve the structure of the problem, we need to check that ˜z and
˜w are still perpendicular, and that Vol(˜y) ≲Vol(y). Finally, we need a homology A from z to ˜z
with volume as small as we like. Given all these things, we can quickly reduce the perpendicular
pair inequality to the cubical case. By the cubical case, we can ﬁnd a chain ˜y′ with ∂˜y′ = ˜z and


42
LARRY GUTH
with HCn(˜y′) ≲Voln(˜y) ≲Voln(y). Finally, we deﬁne y′ = A + ˜y′. We see that ∂y′ = z. Also,
HCn(y′) ≤HCn(A) + HCn(˜y′) ≲ǫ + Voln(y), where ǫ is as small as we like.
We do the cubical approximation by the Federer-Fleming deformation operator. We let v be a
vector with |v| ≤s0/2, which we can choose later, and we deﬁne for each d-chain T
Dv(T ) :=
X
F d⊂Σd(s0)
[ ¯Fv ∩T ]F.
We let ˜z = Dv(z), ˜w = Dv(w), and ˜y = Dv(y). We will use some standard properties of the Federer-
Fleming deformation operator, which are reviewed in Section 14.4.
The deformation operator
commutes with taking boundaries, and so ∂˜y = ˜z + ˜w.
We can choose v ∈BN(s/2) so that
Voln(˜y) ≲Voln(y), and so that there is a homology A from z to ˜z with volume ≲s0 Voln−1(z). By
taking s0 small enough, we can make this homology as small as we like.
We still have to check that ˜z and ˜w are perpendicular. To do this, we check that the deformation
operator Dv is well-behaved with respect to directed volumes VolJ in Euclidean space.
Lemma 8.18. If T is any mod 2 d-chain in RN, and if J is a d-tuple of integers from 1 to N, then
Averagev∈BN(s/2) VolJ[Dv(z)] ≤C(N) VolJ z.
Proof. Let F be a d-face of Σd(s) in the direction J. We have to consider [ ¯Fv ∩T ]. Let Ball[F]
denote the ball around the center of F with radius 2Ns. Note that for all v ∈BN(s/2), ¯Fv is
contained in Ball[F]. Let πJ be the orthogonal projection onto the J-plane. The probability that
[ ¯Fv ∩T ] ̸= 0 is bounded by C(N)s−N Vol πJ(T ∩Ball[F]) ≤C(N)s−N VolJ(T ∩Ball[F]). Therefore,
Averagev∈BN(s/2) VolJ[Dv(T )] ≤C(N)
X
F ⊂Σd(s),F in direction J
VolJ(T ∩Ball[F]) ≤C(N) VolJ(T ).
□
In particular, if VolJ(T ) = 0, then VolJ(Dv(T )) = 0 almost surely. Therefore, for almost every
v, ˜z and ˜w are still perpendicular. This ﬁnishes the reduction of the perpendicular pair inequality
to the cubical case.
9. Thick tubes
In this section, we deﬁne a tube in RN to be an embedding I : S1 × BN−1 →RN. Recall that
an embedding is called k-expanding if it increases or preserves the k-volume of each k-dimensional
surface. In other words, an embedding is k-expanding if its inverse has k-dilation ≤1. A tube with
k-thickness equal to R is a k-expanding embedding I from S1(δ) × BN−1(R) into RN, where δ > 0
may be arbitrarily small. (Here we write S1(δ) for the circle of radius δ.) We will usually denote
a tube by the letter T . We will say that a tube T lies in some set U ⊂RN if the image of the
embedding lies in U.
For example, consider a solid torus of revolution in R3 given by revolving a disk around the z
axis. If we take a disk of radius 1 with center at a distance 2 from the axis, then we get a tube
of thickness ∼1 contained in a ball of radius 3 around the origin. Surprisingly, there are tubes of
thickness 1 contained in arbitrarily small balls. Their geometry is quite diﬀerent from a solid torus
of revolution.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
43
Thick tube example in three dimensions. For every radius ǫ > 0, there is a tube T with
2-thickness 1 embedded in B3(ǫ) ⊂R3.
(As far as I know, the ﬁrst example was constructed by Zel’dovitch - see [Ar].
We discuss
Zel’dovitch’s construction in Section 11.1.)
Proof. We begin with S1(δ) × B2(1), where we may choose δ as small as we like. This product
isometrically embeds in S1(δ) × [0, 2] × [0, 2]. Now for each λ > 1, we can make a 2-expanding
map from this space into S1(δλ) × [0, 2λ−1] × [0, 2λ] by dilating each coordinate by an appropriate
factor. We choose λ = δ−1/2, so the image of the embedding is S1(δ1/2) × [0, 2δ1/2] × [0, 2δ−1/2].
Now the annulus S1(δ1/2) × [0, 2δ1/2] has a 1-expanding embedding into B2(10δ1/2). Hence our
original space has a 2-expanding embedding into the cylinder B2(10δ1/2) × [0, 2δ−1/2]. Note that
this cylinder has volume ∼δ1/2. The cylinder admits a 1-expanding embedding into B3(100δ1/6).
(See the appendix in Section 14.2 for the details of this embedding.)
□
The situation is diﬀerent for linked tubes. This phenomenon was discovered by Gehring in [Ge].
He proved a result similar to the following.
Gehring-type inequality for linked tubes. If T1 and T2 are disjoint tubes in the unit 3-ball,
with 2-thickness R1 and R2, and with linking number L, then the following inequality holds:
LR2
1R2
2 ≤C.
Proof. Let I1 : S1(δ) × B2(R1) →B3(1) and I2 : S1(δ) × B2(R2) →B3(1) be our 2-expanding
embedding maps. Recall that Ti is the image of Ii. Taking the inverses of our embedding maps, we
get maps πi : Ti →B2(Ri) with 2-dilation at most 1. By the coarea formula, we can ﬁnd a ﬁber of
π1 with length at most Vol(T1)/ Area(B2(R1)) which is at most CR−2
1 . This ﬁber bounds a disk of
area at most CR−4
1
by the isoperimetric inequality. Also, the ﬁber bounds a disk of area at most
CR−2
1
by the cone inequality.
Now this disk cuts across the tube T2 at least |L| times. More precisely, if we let D denote the
disk, then the map π2 from D ∩T2 to B2(R2) has degree L. Hence we see that D has area at least
LπR2
2. Using the upper bound for the area of D from the cone inequality, we see LπR2
2 ≤CR−2
1 ,
and so LR2
1R2
2 ≤C.
This proves the result. If we use the upper bound for the area of D coming from the traditional
isoperimetric inequality, we see that LR2
2 ≤CR−4
1
and so LR4
1R2
2 ≤C. This latter inequality is
stronger when R1 ≫1.
□
To summarize, a tube T with 2-thickness 1 may be squeezed into an arbitrarily small ball in R3,
but if T1 and T2 are linked tubes with 2-thickness 1, then they cannot be squeezed into a small ball
in R3.
Now we recall the idea of the twisting number of a tube in R3. Let p1 and p2 be two points in
B2. Then consider the two circles I(S1 ×{p1}) and I(S1 ×{p2}) in R3. The twisting number of the
tube T is equal to the linking number of these two circles. Moreover, let B1 and B2 be disjoint disks
in B2 with centers at p1 and p2. Then I restricted to S1 × B1 deﬁnes a tube T1 and I restricted to
S1 × B2 deﬁnes a tube T2. We can arrange that T1 and T2 each have thickness at least one third
the thickness of T . Therefore, we get an inequality for the twisting number of a thick tube:
Inequality for twisted tubes. Suppose that T is a tube in the unit 3-ball with 2-thickness R and
twisting number t. Then R4|t| ≤C.


44
LARRY GUTH
(For large values of t, I don’t know whether this inequality is sharp.)
To summarize, in three dimensions, a tube with 2-thickness 1 may be squeezed into an arbi-
trarily small ball B3(ǫ), but a tube with a non-zero twisting number cannot. In the early 1990’s,
Freedman and He [FH] extended Gehring’s work, proving estimates for general knots and links. For
example, they proved that a 3-dimensional tube with 2-thickness 1 contained in a small ball must
be unknotted.
Next we discuss the situation in dimension N ≥4. We begin with the generalization of the thick
tube example.
Thick tube example in higher dimensions. If N ≥3 and k > N/2, then there is a tube T
with k-thickness 1 embedded in BN(ǫ) ⊂RN for every ǫ > 0.
Proof. We begin with S1(δ) × BN−1(1), where we may choose δ as small as we like. This product
isometrically embeds in S1(δ) × [0, 2]N−1.
Now for each λ > 1, we can make a k-expanding
map from this space into S1(δλ
1
k−1 ) × [0, 2λ−1] × [0, 2λ
1
k−1 ]N−2 by dilating each coordinate by an
appropriate factor. We choose λ so that δλ
1
k−1 = λ−1. By making δ small, we can make λ as
large as we like. We are now working with S1(λ−1) × [0, 2λ−1] × [0, 2λ
1
k−1 ]N−2. Now the annulus
S1(λ−1) × [0, 2λ−1] has a 1-expanding embedding into B2(10λ−1). Hence our original space has a
k-expanding embedding into the cylinder B2(10λ−1) × [0, 2λ
1
k−1 ]N−2. Note that this cylinder has
volume ∼λ−2+(N−2)/(k−1). Since k > N/2, the exponent is negative, and we can make the volume
as small as we like. Therefore, this cylinder admits a 1-expanding embedding into an arbitrarily
small ball. (See the appendix in Section 14.2 for the details of this last embedding.)
□
I don’t know whether the range of k in this result is sharp. There is more discussion in the open
problems section, section 13.
In dimension N ≥4, any two circles are unlinked, and so there is no linking number between
tubes. It turns out that it is still possible to deﬁne the twisting number of a tube in Z2.
A tube is given by an embedding I : S1 × BN−1 →RN.
The ‘core circle’ of the tube is
I(S1 ×{0}). The tube structure deﬁnes a trivialization of the normal bundle of this circle – in other
words a framing of this circle. The twisting number comes from this framing - it measures how the
trivialization ‘twists’ as we move around the circle.
As a warmup, suppose that the core circle is just the standard circle S1 ⊂RN, deﬁned by the
equations x2
1 + x2
2 = 1, x3 = ... = xN = 0, and suppose that I : S1 →S1 is the identity map. This
core circle has a standard framing, given by {r, e3, ..., eN}, where r is the outward radial vector
(x1, x2), and e3, ..., eN are the coordinate vectors. Now we can compare the framing coming from
out embedding I with this standard framing. At each point in S1, the two framings each give a basis
of NS1. Therefore, we can get our framing by applying an element of GLN−1(R) to the standard
framing at each point x ∈S1. So our framing induces a continuous map from S1 to GLN−1(R).
If I is orientation-preserving, we see that the image of our map lies in the orientation-preserving
maps GL+
N−1(R), which is homotopic to SO(N −1). Therefore, our framing induces an element
of π1(SO(N −1)). If N ≥4, then π1(SO(N −1)) = Z2, and this homotopy class is the twisting
number of the tube. (If I is orientation reversing, our map goes from S1 to GL−
N−1(R), which is
also homotopic to SO(N −1), and the twisting number is deﬁned in the same way.)
However, this deﬁnition was just a warmup, and we still have to deﬁne the twisting number for
a general embedding I : S1 × BN−1 →RN. The main problem is to deﬁne a standard framing for
an arbitrary embedded circle in RN. Because N ≥4, any two circles are isotopic. Therefore, there
is an orientation-preserving diﬀeomorphism Ψ of RN so that Ψ ◦I is the identity map from S1 to


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
45
the standard S1. The map Ψ gives an isomorphism from the normal bundle of the core circle to the
normal bundle of the standard S1. Using Ψ, we can pull back the standard framing of S1 to give
a standard framing of the core circle. Comparing this standard framing with the framing induced
by the tube, we get a map S1 →GLN−1(R), and the homotopy class of the map gives a twisting
number in Z2. A priori, this deﬁnition may depend on the choice of Ψ, but it turns out that it
does not. This was ﬁrst established by Pontryagin in his study of framed cobordism and homotopy
groups of spheres.
There is a nice description of (some of) this work in Milnor’s book [M]. Pontryagin deﬁned a
notion of framed cobordism, which is an equivalence relation on closed framed k-manifolds within
a given ambient manifold. Pontryagin proved that for N ≥4, there are exactly two equivalence
classes of framed 1-manifolds in RN. He proved that two framed circles are framed cobordant if
and only if they have the same twisting number.
Pontryagin went on to make an important connection between framed cobordisms and homotopy
groups of spheres. Let T be a twisted tube in the unit N-ball. The tube T is deﬁned by an embedding
I from S1 × BN−1 into the unit N-ball, with image T ⊂BN. Using the inverse of I, we construct
a map π : T →BN−1, sending the boundary of T to the boundary of BN−1. We let h be a degree
1 map from (BN−1, ∂BN−1) to SN−1, sending the boundary ∂BN−1 to the basepoint of SN−1.
Let us consider the unit N-ball, BN, as the upper hemisphere of SN. Now we construct a map F
from SN to SN−1 as follows. If x ∈T , then we deﬁne F(x) = h(π(x)). If x is not in T , then we
deﬁne F(x) to be the basepoint of SN−1. This deﬁnition gives a continuous map because if x ∈∂T ,
then π(x) ∈∂BN−1 and h(π(x)) is the basepoint of SN−1. Pontryagin showed that the homotopy
type of the map F depends only on the framed cobordism class of the core circle. In particular, he
proved the following theorem.
Pontryagin’s theorem. If N ≥4, then the twisting number of the tube T in Z2 is non-zero if
and only if the map F is non-contractible.
Since F is non-contractible if and only if SH(F) = 1, we see that the twisting number of T is
equal to the Steenrod-Hopf invariant of F.
Combining our main theorem on k-dilation with Pontryagin’s theorem about twisting numbers
of tubes, we get the following estimate for twisted tubes.
Proposition 9.1. If T is a tube in the unit ball in RN with non-zero twisting number, and if
k ≤(N + 1)/2, then the k-thickness of T is ≤C(N).
Proof. We write A ≲B for A ≤C(N)B. If the tube T has k-thickness R, then the map F has
k-dilation ≲R−k. By our main theorem, if k ≤(N + 1)/2, then the k-dilation of every non-trivial
map SN to SN−1 is ≳1. If k ≤(N + 1)/2, then we see that 1 ≲R−k. Therefore the tube T has
k-thickness R ≲1.
□
Proposition 9.1 is most interesting for odd dimensions N ≥5.
In this case, the thick tube
example in higher dimensions shows that we may embed a tube in the unit N-ball with arbitrarily
large (N + 1)/2-thickness, but Proposition 9.1 shows that if the (N + 1)/2-thickness is too large,
then the twisting number must be zero.
10. Quantitative general position arguments
In the next section, we will prove the h-principle for k-dilation stated in the introduction. In
the construction, we need to construct embeddings with some geometric control. We will construct


46
LARRY GUTH
the embeddings using the h-principle for immersions and general position arguments, and we need
quantitative versions of these arguments to control the geometry of the embeddings.
Our setup will be the following. We have P a polyhedron embedded in a manifold (M m, g), and
we are considering maps to a manifold (N m, h) of the same dimension m. We start with a map
I0 : M →N and we want to perturb the map to an embedding from some neighborhood U ⊃P to
N. We recall some basic results about this situation using immersion theory and general position
arguments, and then we give quantitative versions. We begin by outlining all the results, and then
we come back to the proofs.
We start by recalling the h-principle for immersions. This result was ﬁrst proven by Smale and
Hirsch, see [EM] for references.
The h-principle for immersions. (a special case) Suppose that P ⊂M m is a polyhedron of
dimension p ≤m −1,
and N m is a manifold of the same dimension m,
and I0 : M →N is a smooth map
and T0 : T M →T N is a ﬁberwise isomorphism covering I0.
Then there is an open neighborhood U containing P, and an immersion I1 : U →N so that dI1
is homotopic to T0 through ﬁberwise isomorphisms T U →T N.
We want to make this result more quantitative by estimating the size of U and the local bilipschitz
constant of I1. The standard argument actually gives quantitative estimates, and we will get the
following.
Proposition 10.1. For any s, µ > 0 the following holds. Suppose that P ⊂M m is a polyhedron of
dimension p ≤m −1, and suppose that the following hypotheses hold:
(1) P ⊂(M m, g), and the pair (P, M) has bounded geometry at scale s,
(2) (N m, h) is a Riemannian manifold with bounded geometry at the larger scale 10ms,
(3) I0 : M →N has Lipschitz constant at most 1,
(4) T0 : T M →T N is a ﬁberwise isomorphism covering I0, with ﬁberwise bilipschitz constant
≤µ,
(5) the scale invariant quantity s∥∇T0∥C0 ≤µ,
Then there are constants L and W that depend only on m, µ, and the bounds on the geometry of
M, N, and P, so that the following holds.
Let UW denote the Ws-neighborhood of P ⊂M.
Then I0 can be homotoped to a smooth immersion I1 : UW →N which is locally L-bilipschitz.
Also, dI1 is homotopic to T0 in the category of ﬁberwise isomorphisms T UW →T N, and the
distance from I0(x) to I1(x) is ≤Ls for each x ∈Uw.
At the end of this subsection, we will give a precise formulation of bounded geometry.
Since this statement is rather long, we take a moment to explain why we need all the hypotheses.
Basically, we are perturbing I0 at a scale ∼s in order to make I1 a bilipschitz immersion on a
neighborhood of size ∼s. To do this, we need to know that the geometry of the domain and range
is controlled at this scale. Also, if I0 did not have a controlled Lipschitz constant, we could not
expect to make the Lipschitz constant ≲1 by a small perturbation. The map T0 is supposed to be
a model for dI1, so we need to know that it is bilipschitz on each ﬁber. The subtlest hypothesis is
hypothesis (5), which says that s∥∇T0∥C0 ≲µ. This condition prevents T0 from spinning around
too much. To see that this is necessary, consider the following example. Suppose that N is the
Euclidean plane R2, M ⊂R2 is the annulus deﬁned by 1/2 < |x| < 2, P is the unit circle, and I0 is


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
47
the function zero. Suppose that for each point x ∈M, T0 is an isometry from R2 to R2, so T0 gives
a map from S1 to SO(2). If T0 has a high degree, wrapping S1 many times around SO(2), then it’s
impossible to ﬁnd an immersion I1 which obeys the conclusions of the proposition.
Next we would like to know if we can make I1 an embedding. This is a very diﬃcult question in
general, but there is one simple result coming from a general position argument. If the dimension
of P is ≤(m −1)/2, then a generic perturbation of I1 is an embedding from P into N. Since I1 is
an immersion, a generic perturbation of I1 is an embedding from a small neighborhood of P into
N. We will give a quantitative version of this general position argument leading to the following
embedding estimate.
Proposition 10.2. For any s, µ > 0 the following holds. Suppose that P ⊂M m is a polyhedron of
dimension p ≤(m −1)/2, and suppose that the following hypotheses hold:
(1) P ⊂(M m, g), and the pair (P, M) has bounded geometry at scale s,
(2) (N m, h) is a Riemannian manifold with bounded geometry at the larger scale 10ms,
(3) I0 : M →N has Lipschitz constant at most 1,
(4) T0 : T M →T N is a ﬁberwise isomorphism covering I0, with ﬁberwise bilipschitz constant
≤µ,
(5) the scale invariant quantity s∥∇T0∥C0 ≤µ,
(6) I0 maps at most µ vertices of P into any s-ball in N.
Then there are constants L and W that depend only on m, µ, and the bounds on the geometry of
M, N, and P, so that the following holds.
Let UW denote the Ws-neighborhood of P ⊂M.
Then I0 can be homotoped to a smooth embedding I : UW →N which is locally L-bilipschitz.
Also, dI is homotopic to T0 in the category of ﬁberwise isomorphisms T UW →T N, and the
distance from I0(x) to I(x) is ≤Ls for each x ∈Uw.
The hypotheses in this proposition are mostly the same as those in Proposition 10.1. We assume
that the dimension of P is ≤(m −1)/2 instead of m −1. Hypotheses (1)-(5) are exactly the same.
We had to add one new hypothesis: that I0 maps ≤µ vertices of P into any s-ball of N. Since I
is supposed to be a bilipschitz embedding from UW , the images of the balls centered at vertices of
P with radius Ws will contain disjoint balls of radius ∼s. Therefore, the map I cannot cram too
many vertices of P into a ball of radius s. And since I is only a small perturbation of I0, we need
I0 to obey this condition as well.
To prove Proposition 10.2, we need to revisit the general position argument and give quantitative
estimates. This proof is the main work involved in this section.
Proposition 10.2 gives an embedding with quantitative control, but it doesn’t tell us what isotopy
class the embedding will be in. If p = Dim P = (m −1)/2, then there will typically be inﬁnitely
many diﬀerent isotopy classes of embeddings from P into N, and we cannot get uniform geometric
control for all the isotopy classes. But under the stronger condition that the dimension of P is
< (m −1)/2, then we can construct a geometrically controlled embedding in any isotopy class.
Quantitative embedding lemma. For any s, µ > 0 the following holds. Suppose that P ⊂M m
is a polyhedron of dimension p < (m −1)/2, and suppose that the following hypotheses hold:
(1) P ⊂(M m, g), and the pair (P, M) has bounded geometry at scale s,
(2) (N m, h) is a Riemannian manifold with bounded geometry at the larger scale 10ms,
(3) I0 : M →N has Lipschitz constant at most 1,
(4) T0 : T M →T N is a ﬁberwise isomorphism covering I0, with ﬁberwise bilipschitz constant
≤µ,


48
LARRY GUTH
(5) the scale invariant quantity s∥∇T0∥C0 ≤µ,
(6) I0 maps at most µ vertices of P into any s-ball in N.
(7) I′ : M →N is an embedding and dI′ is homotopic to T0 in the category of ﬁberwise
isomorphisms from T M to T N.
Then there are constants L and W that depend only on m, µ, and the bounds on the geometry of
M, N, and P, so that the following holds.
Let UW denote the Ws-neighborhood of P ⊂M.
Then I0 can be homotoped to a smooth embedding I : UW →N which is locally L-bilipschitz and
isotopic to I′, and the distance from I0(x) to I(x) is ≤Ls for each x ∈Uw.
The hypotheses here are almost the same as in Proposition 10.2. We assume that Dim P <
(m −1)/2 instead of Dim P ≤(m −1)/2. Hypotheses (1) - (6) are exactly the same. Hypothesis
(7) says that the data (I0, T0) is homotopic to (I′, dI′) for some embedding M →N. In this case,
we get an embedding I with controlled geometry isotopic to I′.
The quantitative embedding lemma is the result that we will use to prove the h-principle for
k-dilation. It follows easily from Proposition 10.2, so we give the proof here. The point is that the
embedding I we constructed in Proposition 10.2 is automatically isotopic to I′.
Proof. By Proposition 10.2, we can construct an L-bilipschitz embedding I : UW →N so that dI is
homotopic to dI′ in the category of ﬁberwise isomorphisms from T UW to T N. By the h-principle
for immersions, I is regular homotopic to I′. We will prove that I is also isotopic to I′. The point
is that there is only one isotopy class of embeddingss UW →N regular homotopic to I′.
Let ht be a regular homotopy from h0 = I′ to h1 = I.
We can assume that ht is in general position. Because p < (m −1)/2, ht : P →N will be an
embedding for every t. Now we can choose some tiny ǫ > 0, so that ht : Uǫ →N is an embedding
for all t.
Notice that UW deformation retracts into Uǫ for any 0 < ǫ < W. In more details, let Ψt : UW →
UW be an isotopy with Ψ0 equal to the identity and Ψ1(UW ) ⊂Uǫ. Now we deﬁne Ht : UW →N
with t ∈[0, 3] as follows. For times t ∈[0, 1], we deﬁne Ht = h0 ◦Ψt. For times t ∈[1, 2], we deﬁne
Ht = ht−1 ◦Ψ1. For times t ∈[2, 3], we deﬁne Ht = h1 ◦Ψ3−t. The maps Ht give an isotopy from
I′ = h0 to I = h1.
□
In the next two subsections we will give the proofs of the propositions. To ﬁnish this subsection,
we give a precise formulation of the phrase bounded local geometry. We say that a Riemannian
manifold has bounded local geometry at scale s if each ball of radius s is diﬀeomorphic to a Euclidean
ball of radius s with bilipschitz norm ≲1 and C2 norm ≲s−1. (The deﬁnition is scale invariant.)
We say that P ⊂M has bounded geometry at scale s, if for each k-simplex we can choose the above
coordinates so that the k-simplex is mapped to a standard equilateral k-simplex in the Euclidean
ball, and if in addition, each edge of P has length ≤s, the distance between any two disjoint closed
faces of P is ≳s, and the dihedral angles of P are ≳1.
10.1. Constructing immersions with geometric control. In this section, we prove Proposition
10.1. This result essentially follows from the standard proof of the immersion theory by keeping
track of constants.
Proof. By scaling, we may assume that the scale s is equal to 1.
We write A ≲B to mean that A ≤CB for a constant C that only depends on m, µ, and the
bounded local geometry of M, N, P.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
49
This construction is based on the relative h-principle for immersions. We will use the following
version of the h-principle.
Let Lin(Rm, Rm) denote the linear maps from Euclidean space Rm to itself.
Let Bil(L) ⊂
Lin(Rm, Rm) denote the linear isomorphisms with bilipschitz constant ≤L.
Relative h-principle for immersions with quantitative control. Suppose that ∆d ⊂Rm is
a unit equilateral d-simplex in Euclidean space, with d < m.
Let NW ∆d be the W-neighborhood of ∆d in Rm.
Suppose we have smooth maps
I0 : NW0∆d →Bm(1),
T0 : NW0∆d →Lin(Rm, Rm).
Suppose that T0 and dI0 agree on NW0∂∆.
Suppose that T0 and I0 have C1 norms ≤A0.
Suppose that the image of T0 lies in Bil(L0) ⊂Lin(Rm, Rm).
Then there are smooth homotopies I : NW0∆× [0, 1] →Bm(1) and T : NW0∆× [0, 1] →
Lin(Rm, Rm) with the following properties.
For all t, It = I0 and Tt = T0 on NW0/2∂∆and outside of N2W1∆.
T1 and dI1 agree on NW1∆.
The maps I and T have C1 norms ≤A1.
The image of Tt lies in Bil(L1) for all t.
In this theorem, the constants W0, L0, A0 may be arbitrary, and the constants W1, A1, L1 depend
on them, as well as on d, m.
This result is essentially the standard relative h-principle for immersions. The proof may be
found in [EM], pages 21-35 and 66-68. The only non-standard ingredient is that the constants
W1, A1, L1 only depend on the ingredients d, m, W0, A0, L0. This can be observed by following the
proof in [EM] and keeping track of the constants at each step.
Without writing out the entire proof of the h-principle for immersions, I want to try to give
some explanation of why the constants are controlled. The proof of the h-principle for immersions
in [EM] is based on a fundamentally 2-dimensional construction which is then repeated several
times. We begin with I0, T0 deﬁned on NW0∆1 ⊂R2. The functions may depend on other variables
also, but we can suppress the dependence and think of the other variables as just parameters. We
say that a pair (I, T ) is holonomic if dI = T .
We choose a set of evenly spaced points along
∆1 with some spacing ǫ - a crucial small number that we will choose later. Next, we deﬁne a
rectangular block centered at each of these points with width (along ∆1) of 4ǫ and height 2W0.
On each block, say block J, we perturb (I0, T0) to a holonomic pair (IJ, TJ). To be explicit, let
us take IJ be an aﬃne function so that (IJ, TJ) = (IJ, dIJ) agrees with (I0, T0) at the center of
block J. The blocks overlap, so we can also deﬁne some functions that interpolate between the
(IJ, TJ) on the overlaps. We deﬁne holonomic pairs (IJ,J+1, TJ,J+1) which agree with (IJ, TJ) in
the middle part of the intersection (say NW0/4∆) and agree with (IJ+1, TJ+1) on the outside part
of the intersection (say outside of N3W0/4∆). We can do this by taking weighted averages of IJ
and IJ+1, say IJ,J+1 = ρIJ + (1 −ρ)IJ+1, where ρ is 1 near the middle of the intersection and
on the outside part of the intersection. Gluing together the diﬀerent IJ and IJ,J+1 we get a a
function I which is holonomic on NW1∆except on some vertical slits with spacing ǫ/2 – see the
pictures on pages 27-28 of [EM]. (On the slits, I is not even deﬁned.) At each point, the linear


50
LARRY GUTH
transformation TJ is L0-bilipschitz because TJ is constant and it agrees with T0 at one point. Now
TJ,J+1 is the derivative of a weighted average of Ij and Ij+1. If Ij and Ij+1 are very close together
in C1, then the weighted average will also have controlled bilipschitz constant. Hence the map I
is an immersion with controlled bilipschitz constant (on the complement of the slits). Finally, we
precompose I with a map φ : NW0∆1 →NW0∆1 whose image avoids the slits. The image is a thin
neighborhood of a rapidly oscillating curve. The resulting map is an immersion.
To get quantitative estimates, we just need to bound explicitly the characters that enter the
story in terms of W0, A0, L0. We write A ≲B for A ≤C(W0, A0, L0)B. We let xJ be the center
of block J. Then TJ = T0(xJ), and so |TJ+1 −TJ| ≤A0ǫ. Also |I0(xJ+1) −I0(xJ)| ≤A0ǫ, and so
|IJ(x) −IJ+1(x)| ≤A0ǫ + 4L0ǫ, for each x in the overlap of block J and block J + 1. In summary,
the C1 distance from (IJ, TJ) to (IJ+1, TJ+1) is ≲ǫ. To check that TJ,J+1 has controlled bilipschitz
constant, we compute:
TJ,J+1 = dIJ,J+1 = d (ρIJ + (1 −ρ)IJ+1) = TJ+1 + ρ(TJ −TJ+1) + dρ(IJ −IJ+1).
We have |TJ −TJ+1| ≲ǫ, |IJ −IJ+1| ≲ǫ and |dρ| ≤100W −1
0
≲1. As long as we choose ǫ very
small compared to (1/L0) and W0 and (1/A0), we see that TJ,J+1 is still 2L0-bilipschitz. This is the
key step where we choose the size of ǫ - and we see that ǫ only depends on W0, A0, and L0. Once
we have controlled IJ,J+1, we see that the bilipschitz constant and C1 norm of I, T is controlled.
Once we have picked ǫ, then we know how closely the slits are located, and we can bound the size
of arbitrarily many derivatives of φ. Given bounds on the size of the derivatives of φ, we can then
bound the bilipschitz constant and norms of I ◦φ.
To construct the map I1 we must repeat this two-dimensional argument d times, but each time
the quantitative analysis goes like in the last paragraphs. This ﬁnishes our explanation of why the
constants W1, A1, L1 depend only on d, m, W0, A0, L0.
The condition that (It, Tt) = (I0, T0) for all x outside of N2W1∆doesn’t appear in [EM], but it’s
trivial to add. Suppose that (I′
t, T ′
t) obey all the other conditions of the theorem. Let ρ : NW0∆→
[0, 1] be equal to 1 on NW1∆and equal to zero outside of N2W1∆. Then set (It, Tt) = (I′
ρ(x)t, T ′
ρ(x)t).
This ﬁnishes our discussion of the relative h-principle for immersions with quantitative control stated
above. Now we apply it to prove Proposition 10.1.
Let I0 and T0 be as in Proposition 10.1. We homotope our map I0 and our initial data T0 to a
bilipschitz immersion by applying this result one skeleton at a time. We construct a sequence of
(homotopic) maps, (I0, T0), (¯I0, ¯T0), (¯I1, ¯T1), etc. with the following properties:
• The maps (¯Ij, ¯Tj) are all deﬁned on a W0-neighborhood of P.
• All the maps ¯Ij agree with I0 at the vertices of P.
• The C1 norms of ¯Ij and ¯Tj are bounded by Aj.
• The bilipschitz constant of ¯Tj is ≤Lj.
• The maps ¯Tj are all homotopic to T0 in the category of ﬁberwise isomorphisms T UWj →T N.
• On a Wj neighborhood of the j-skeleton of P, we have d¯Ij = ¯Tj, and so on this neighborhood
¯Ij is an immersion with local bilipschitz constant ≤Lj.
• The map ¯Ij sends the Wj-neighborhood of each j-face into a ball of radius ≤10j in (N, h).
• The constants Aj and Lj are ≲1 and Wj ≳1.
Constructing (¯I0, ¯T0) is elementary.
Then each homotopy from (¯Ij−1, ¯Tj−1) to (¯Ij, ¯Tj) is constructed by using the quantitative relative
h-principle on each simplex. Since ¯Ij−1 maps a Wj−1-neighborhood of each (j-1)-simplex to a ball of
radius 10j−1, it follows that it maps each Wj−1-neighborhood of each j-simplex to a ball of radius


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
51
10j. Since N has bounded local geometry at scale 10m, we can pick a C2-controlled change of
coordinates from this ball to the unit m-ball. Using these coordinates and the relative h-principle
for immersions with quantitative control, we homotope ¯Ij−1 to ¯Ij around the given j-simplex. This
homotopy is constant except on N2Wj∆\ NWj−1/2∂∆. Because of our control on the angles and
geometry of P, we can choose Wj so that these active regions don’t overlap.
Each ¯Tj is homotopic to ¯Tj−1. The constants A0, L0, W0 depend on µ, m, and the bounded local
geometry of M, P, N. The constants Aj, Lj, Wj depend on Aj−1, Lj−1, Wj−1 and the bounded local
geometry of M, N, P. By induction, we have all Aj, Lj ≲1 and all Wj ≳1. In this way, we arrive
at an immersion I1 : UW →(N, h) which is locally L-bilipschitz, where W ≳1 and L ≲1. We
also see that dI1 is homotopic to T0 in the category of ﬁberwise isomorphisms. The distance from
¯Ij−1(x) to ¯Ij(x) is ≤10j+1, and so the distance from I0(x) to I1(x) is ≤10m+1. By choosing L
suﬃciently large, this is also less than L.
□
10.2. Constructing embeddings with geometric control. In this subsection, we give the proof
of Proposition 10.2.
Proof. By scaling, we may assume that the scale s is equal to 1.
We write A ≲B to mean that A ≤CB for a constant C that only depends on m, µ, and the
bounded local geometry of M, N, P.
By Proposition 10.1, we can ﬁnd an immersion I1 : Uw1 →N which is locally L1-bilipschitz,
where w1 ≳1 and L1 ≲1. We also know that dI1 is homotopic to T0 and that the distance from
I0(x) to I1(x) is always ≲1. Our goal is to modify I1 to make it an embedding. A general position
argument shows that a generic perturbation of I1 is an embedding from P to N, and hence from
some tiny neighborhood of P to N. We will make this argument more quantitative. Here is an
outline of what we will do. (Recall that Uw denotes the w-neighborhood of P in M.)
Step 1. We slightly deform I1 to another immersion I2, by ﬂowing on a vector ﬁeld. The map
I2 : Uw1 →N still has controlled local bilipschitz constant.
The map I2 depends on many parameters (which are used to specify the vector ﬁeld). We will
prove that for some values of these parameters, the map I2 obeys the conclusion.
Step 2. The restriction of I2 to a ball B(p, r) is actually an embedding as long as p ∈Uw1/2 and
r is suﬃciently small. This step holds for all the choices of the parameters.
Step 3. For some smaller scale w2 ≪w1, the mapping I2 : Uw2 →N is actually an embedding
for some choices of the parameters used to deﬁne I2. This last step is a quantitative version of the
general position arguments. We check that only a bad coincidence would force I2 to be non-injective,
and we check that there are some choices of the parameters which avoid all the bad coincidences.
The map I2 obeys the conclusion: it embeds Uw2 into N with controlled bilipschitz constant.
We take W = w2.
Step 1: Putting I1 in “general position”
We now perturb I1 by precomposing it with the ﬂow from a vector ﬁeld.
Let us pick an open cover of ¯Uw1 using balls of radius w′
1. Here w′
1 is a constant that we will
choose below. We will have w′
1 ≤w1/100 and w′
1 ≳1. Since (M m, g) is locally bounded at scale 1,
we can arrange that the cover has bounded multiplicity. We call the balls in the cover Bj. We let
Ψj be smooth non-negative functions, supported on Bj, so that P
j Ψj is equal to 1 on Uw1 (and
≤1 everywhere). For 1 ≤l ≤m, we let Vj,l be vector ﬁelds deﬁned on Bj which are essentially
orthonormal and essentially constant.


52
LARRY GUTH
For any numbers aj,l ∈[−1, 1], we can build the vector ﬁeld V = P
j,l aj,lΨjVj,l. Note that
|∇Ψ| ≲1, and so |∇V | ≲1. We deﬁne the map Φ : (M, g) →(M, g) to be the time tflow ﬂow of
the vector ﬁeld V . Here tflow ≳1 is a small time which we will choose below.
Now we deﬁne our perturbed map I2 to be I1 ◦Φ.
By choosing the ﬂow time tflow ≳1 suﬃciently small compared to w′
1, we can arrange that the
map Φ is bilipschitz with bilipschitz constant ≤2, and that it moves each point a distance ≤w′
1.
Therefore, Φ maps Uw1/2 into Uw1. If we restrict the map I2 to Uw1/2, we get an immersion with
local bilipschitz constant L ≤2L1 ≲1.
The map I2 has all of the properties that we want, except that we don’t know whether it’s an
embedding. The embedding Φ : Uw1/2 →Uw1 is isotopic to the identity, so dI2 is homotopic to T0.
It’s easy to check that the distance from I2(x) to I0(x) is ≲1. In steps 2 and 3, we will check that
for some values of the parameters aj,l, the map I2 restricted to Uw2 is injective for some w2 ≳1.
Step 2. Injectivity on small balls
A bilipschitz immersion isn’t always injective, but if we restrict a bilipschitz immersion to a small
centrally located ball, then the restriction is automatically injective. We begin with a lemma about
bilipschitz immersions in Euclidean space.
Lemma 10.3. Suppose that I is a locally L-bilipschitz immersion from Bm(1) into Rm. Then the
restriction of I to the ball of radius r around 0 is an embedding for r = (1/10)L−2.
Proof. The immersion I obeys a version of the homotopy lifting property as long as the lifts don’t
touch ∂Bm.
Suppose that K is a compact polyhedron and g0 : K →Rm is a continuous map which happens
to have a lift: in other words, there is a map ˜g0 : K →Bm(1) so that g0 = I ◦˜g0.
Now let gt : K →Rm be a homotopy of g0, deﬁned for t ∈[0, 1].
The homotopy gt always lifts to a unique homotopy ˜gt : K →Bm(1) for t in a small interval
around 0. Then there are two possibilities.
Case A. The homotopy gt lifts to a homotopy ˜gt for all t ∈[0, 1].
Case B. The homotopy gt lifts to a homotopy ˜gt for t in a maximal interval [0, T ), and for every
ǫ > 0, the image ˜gt(K) touches the ǫ-neighbhorhood of ∂Bm(1) for some t < T .
Now, suppose that I is not an embedding on B(r). In that case, there are two distinct points
x, y ∈B(r) with I(x) = I(y). By translating I, we may suppose I(x) = I(y) = 0.
Now let ˜g0 : [0, 1] →Bm(1) parametrize the segment from x to y, with ˜g0(0) = x and ˜g0(1) = y.
This segment has length at most 2r. Then we let g0 = I ◦˜g0 : [0, 1] →Rm. The function g0
parametrizes a curve in Rm with g0(0) = g0(1) = 0. The length of the curve is at most 2rL.
Next we homotope g0 to zero by rescaling. We deﬁne gt(s) = (1 −t)g0(s) for t ∈[0, 1]. We see
that gt(0) = gt(1) = 0 for all t and that g1(s) = 0 for all s. The length of the curve parametrized
by gt decreases monotonically, and so it is always ≤2rL.
Now we consider the lifts ˜gt of gt. These lifts exist on some interval [0, T ) or [0, 1]. For every t
where the lift ˜gt is deﬁned, ˜gt(0) = x and ˜gt(1) = y. Moreover, each lift has length at most 2rL2.
Because r = (1/10)L−2, each lift has length at most (1/5). Also, r ≤1/10, and so x and y lie in
B(1/10). Now ˜gt parametrizes a curve from x to y of length at most (1/5). This curve must lie
entirely in B(1/2).
Because of this bound, Case B above is excluded. Therefore, we can deﬁne lifts ˜gt for all t ∈[0, 1].
But ˜g1 is a lift of the constant curve g1, and so ˜g1 is a constant. However, ˜g1(0) = x and ˜g1(1) = y.
This contradiction shows that I is an embedding on B(r) as claimed.
□


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
53
At this point we may choose the constant w′
1. In Step 1, we needed to know that w′
1 ≤w1/100.
We deﬁne w′
1 to be the much smaller number w′
1 = 10−6L−3w1, where L is the local bilipschitz
constant of I2. We know that w1 ≳1 and L ≲1, and so w′
1 ≳1.
Lemma 10.4. Suppose that p ∈Uw1/4 and r = 100w′
1. Then the restriction of I2 to B(p, r) is an
embedding.
Proof. Let R = 100L2r. Because r = 100w′
1 ≤10−4L−3w1, we see that R ≤L−1w1/100. In
particular B(p, R) is contained in Uw1/2. Therefore, we know that I2 : B(p, R) →N is a locally
L-bilipschitz immersion. The image I2(B(p, R)) must lie in a ball in N of radius ≤LR ≤w1/100.
Because of the bounded local geometry of M and N, we know that B(p, R) and this target ball in
N are each 2-bilipschitz to balls in Euclidean space. In particular, we can use geodesic coordinates
centered at p on the ball B(p, R). In these coordinates, B(p, R) is mapped to Bm(R) and B(p, r)
is mapped to Bm(r) ⊂Bm(R). The resulting map from Bm(R) to Rm is 4L bilipschitz. Since
r < (1/10)(4L)−2R, Lemma 10.3 implies that this map restricted to Bm(r) is an embedding.
Therefore, the map I2 : B(p, r) →N is an embedding.
□
Step 3. General position estimates
Now we restrict I2 to Uw2 for w2 = ǫw′
1. The number ǫ > 0 is a small constant that we will
choose later. (Eventually, we will choose ǫ ≳1, but until we choose ǫ, we write lemmas that hold
for every ǫ > 0.)
Recall that in Step 1, we deﬁned a cover of Uw1 by balls Bj of radius w′
1. Now we choose a cover
of Uw2 with balls B′
k of radius w2 = ǫw′
1. We can choose a covering with bounded multiplicity.
Because P has dimension p, we see that for each j, Uw2 ∩Bj is covered by ≲ǫ−p balls B′
k.
By Step 2, we know that I2 restricted to B(p, r) is injective as long as p ∈Uw1/4 and r ≤100w′
1.
In particular, I2 is injective on each ball Bj that intersects Uw2.
Recall that the map I2 depends on the parameters aj,l. We will prove that I2 : Uw2 →N is an
embedding for some choice of the parameters aj,l and for some ǫ ≳1. Let us deﬁne Bad(j1, j2) to
be the set of parameters so that there exists x1 ̸= x2 and I2(x1) = I2(x2), where x1 ∈Uw2 ∩Bj1
and x2 ∈Uw2 ∩Bj2. If aj,l are parameters so that I2 is not injective, then the parameters must lie
in one of the sets Bad(j1, j2).
We can assign a probability measure to the set of parameter choices, by choosing each parameter
aj,l uniformly at random in [−1, 1]. With this probability measure, we will prove that each set
Bad(j1, j2) is small. This is the key step of the proof, where we use the condition that p ≤(m−1)/2.
Lemma 10.5. The measure of Bad(j1, j2) is ≲ǫ.
Proof. Let us deﬁne Bad(k1, k2) to be the set of parameters so that there exists x1 ̸= x2 and
I2(x1) = I2(x2), where x1 ∈B′
k1 and x2 ∈B′
k2. We are going to prove that the probability of each
Bad(k1, k2) is ≲ǫm. We give a rough intuition why this is true. The images I2(B′
k1) and I2(B′
k2)
are approximately balls of radius ∼ǫ. When we change the parameters, we randomly move these
balls in N a distance ∼1. So the probability that they intersect is ≲ǫm.
Now Bad(j1, j2) can be covered by ∪Bad(k1, k2), taking the union over all B′
k1 that intersect Bj1
and all B′
k2 that intersect Bj2. Because P has dimension p, the number of balls Bk1 that intersect
Bj1 is ≲ǫ−p. Therefore, the probability of Bad(j1, j2) is ≲ǫm−2p. Because p ≤(m −1)/2, this
probability is ≲ǫ.


54
LARRY GUTH
It remains to carefully prove that for each k1, k2, the probability of Bad(k1, k2) is ≲ǫm. If the
distance from B′
k1 to B′
k2 is < 40w′
1, then by Step 2, I2 is always injective on a ball containing B′
k1
and B′
k2. In this case Bad(k1, k2) is empty and it has probability zero.
If the distance from B′
k1 to B′
k2 is ≥40w′
1, then we can ﬁnd a ball Bj0 so that Ψj0 ≳1 on B′
k1
and Bj0 is far from B′
k2. We ﬁx j0, and we consider changing the parameters aj0,l while holding
ﬁxed all the other parameters (the aj,l with j ̸= j0).
Changing the parameters aj0,l aﬀects the vector ﬁeld V only on the ball Bj0. Since the ﬂow Φ
moves each point at most w′
1 (for any choice of parameters), it follows that changing aj0,l aﬀects
Φ(x) only if x lies in the w′
1-neighborhood of Bj0. Therefore, changing aj0,l aﬀects I2(x) only if x
lies in the w′
1-neighborhood of Bj0. Since the distance from B′
k2 to Bj0 is at least 35w′
1, we see that
changing the parameters aj0,l does not change I2 on B′
k2.
Since I2 is L-Lipschitz, the image I2(B′
k2) is contained in a ball of radius ≤Lw2 = Lǫw′
1 ≲ǫ.
Let 2Bj0 be the ball with the same center as Bj0 and twice the radius. Since B′
k1 intersects Bj0,
B′
k1 is totally contained in 2Bj0. The map I1 : 10Bj0 →N is a locally L-bilipschitz embedding.
Therefore, I−1
1 (I2(B′
k2) ∩2Bj0 is contained in a ball of radius ≲Lǫ ≲ǫ - call this ball B(ǫ). Notice
that B(ǫ) doesn’t depend on the parameters aj0,l.
If I2(B′
k1) intersects I2(B′
k2), then Φ(B′
k1) must intersect B(ǫ). Since Φ is 2-bilipschitz, Φ must
map the center of the ball B′
k1 into the double of B(ǫ). Let x0 denote the center of B′
k1. Recall
that we randomly choose the parameters aj0,l for 1 ≤l ≤m, and ﬁx aj,l for all j ̸= j0. We have to
prove that the probability that Φ(x0) lies in a ﬁxed ball of radius ≲ǫ is ≲ǫm.
We pick coordinates for 10Bj0 so that the vector ﬁelds Vj0,l are just the coordinate vector ﬁelds
∂l. Then we can write V in these coordinates as V0 + Ψ⃗a, where Ψ = Ψj0 and ⃗a is the vector
with components aj0,l. Then we deﬁne Φt
⃗a(x) to be the result of the time t ﬂow of the vector ﬁeld
V = V0 + Ψ⃗a with initial condition x. By the fundamental theorem of calculus in this coordinate
chart, we see that
Φt
⃗a(x0) = x0 +
Z t
0
[V0(Φs
⃗a(x0)) + Ψ(Φs
⃗a(x0))⃗a] ds.
(∗)
Subtracting and taking norms, we get
sup
0≤s≤t
|Φs
⃗a(x0) −Φs
⃗b(x0)| ≤t(|∇V0| + |∇Ψ|) sup
0≤s≤t
|Φs
⃗a(x0) −Φs
⃗b(x0)| + t|⃗a −⃗b|.
Therefore, there exists a time t0 ≳1 so that for all t ≤t0 and all ⃗a,⃗b with components ≤1, we
have
|Φt
⃗a(x0) −Φt
⃗b(x0)| ≤2t|⃗a −⃗b|.
Plugging this back into formula (*), we see that there is a smaller time t1 ≳1 and a constant
c1 ≳1 so that for all t ≥t1 and all ⃗a,⃗b with components ≤1 we have
|Φt
⃗a(x0) −Φt
⃗b(x0)| ≥c1t|⃗a −⃗b|.
We choose the ﬂow time tflow in the deﬁnition of Φ so that both these bounds hold. Now the
choice of all possible ⃗a so that Φt
⃗a(x0) lies in the bad target B(2ǫ) is contained in a ball of radius
≲ǫ and probability ≲ǫm. So the probability that Φ(B′
k1) intersects B(ǫ) is ≲ǫm. Therefore, the
probability of Bad(k1, k2) is ≲ǫm.
□


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
55
This lemma is useful, but there is still some ways to go in our proof. We have shown that each
set Bad(j1, j2) is small, but we have no control over the number of sets Bad(j1, j2).
Our situation can be described as follows. Suppose that X = Q
i∈I Xi is a (countable or ﬁnite)
product of probability spaces. Suppose that Bad ⊂X is a “bad” set, consisting of a union Bad =
∪α Badα. We would like to ﬁnd a not-bad element of X i.e. an element x ∈X which is not in Bad.
We know that the measure (probability) of each Badα is less than ǫ a small number. But, we have
no control over the number of sets Badα. We can still ﬁnd an element outside of Bad provided that
the sets Badα are “localized” in the following sense.
Lemma 10.6. Suppose that Bad is the union of sets Badα each with probability less than ǫ. Suppose
that each set Badα depends on < C1 diﬀerent coordinates xi of the point x. Suppose that each
variable is relevant for < C2 diﬀerent bad sets Badα. If ǫ < (1/2)C−C1
2
, then Bad is not all of X.
We give a proof of this probability lemma in Section 14.1.
In order to apply this lemma, we must estimate the constants C1 and C2 in our situation.
Lemma 10.7. Suppose that Bad(j1, j2) depends on the value of a parameter aj,l. Then the distance
from Bj to (Bj1 ∪Bj2) is ≤w′
1.
Therefore, each set Bad(j1, j2) depends on ≲1 parameters aj,l.
Proof. Recall that I2 = I1 ◦Φ, and that Φ moves each point a distance ≤w′
1. The parameter aj,l
only aﬀects V on Bj. If the distance from x to Bj is > w′
1, then Φ(x) will not depend on the
parameter aj,l. Therefore, I2(x) will not depend on the parameter aj,l. So if the parameter aj,l
aﬀects Bad(j1, j2), then there must be a point x in either Bj1 or Bj2 which lies a distance ≤w′
1
from Bj.
□
Next, we have to estimate the number of diﬀerent sets Bad(j1, j2) which are inﬂuenced by a
single parameter aj,l. As a ﬁrst step we prove the following lemma.
Lemma 10.8. If Bad(j1, j2) is non-empty for some choice of the parameters aj,l, then the distance
from I0(Bj1) to I0(Bj2) is ≲1.
Proof. We saw above that Dist(I0(x), I2(x)) ≲1. If Bad(j1, j2) is non-empty (for some parameters
aj,l), then we can ﬁnd x1 ∈Bj1 and x2 ∈Bj2 with I2(x1) = I2(x2). Then we conclude that the
distance from I0(x1) to I0(x2) is ≲1.
□
Lemma 10.9. Each parameter aj,l inﬂunces ≲1 bad sets Bad(j1, j2).
Proof. Fix a parameter aj,l. Suppose that Bad(j1, j2) depends on aj,l. By Lemma 10.7, we see that
Bj lies fairly close to either Bj1 or Bj2. After changing the labels, we can assume that the distance
from Bj to Bj1 is ≲w′
1. This leaves only ≲1 choices for j1. Let us ﬁx a choice of j1, and consider
how many choices we have for j2 so that Bad(j1, j2) depends on aj,l.
If I0(Bj1) and I0(Bj2) are far apart, then the last lemma tells us that Bad(j1, j2) is empty. (And
if Bad(j1, j2) is empty, it does not depend on aj,l.) So we only need to consider j2 so that the
distance from I0(Bj1) to I0(Bj2) is ≲1. In other words, we just need to count the number of j2
so that I0 maps Bj2 into a certain ball of radius ≲1. We will show that the number of such j2 is
≲µ ≲1. We know that I0 maps at most µ ≲1 vertices of P into any unit ball of N. Since N has
bounded geometry at scale 1, it follows that I0 maps ≲1 vertices of P into any ball of radius ≲1.
Then by the bounded geometry of P, and since I0 is Lipschitz, it follows that I0 maps ≲1 balls
Bj2 into any ball of radius ≲1.
□


56
LARRY GUTH
Now we can ﬁnish the proof of the embedding proposition.
If we choose ǫ small enough, then the probability lemma guarantees that we can ﬁnd a choice of
parameters aj,l which is not in any bad set Bad(j1, j2). Therefore, I2 : Uw2 →N is an embedding.
Plugging in our inequalities, we see that we can choose ǫ ≳1, and so w2 ≳1 also. The number w2 is
the W from the statement of the proposition. The embedding I2 : Uw2 →N is locally L-bilipschitz
for L ≲1.
□
11. An h-principle for k-dilation
In this section, we prove the h-principle for k-dilation stated in the introduction.
An h-principle for k-dilation. Suppose that F0 is a map from Sm to Sn with m > n, and that
k > (m + 1)/2. Then for any ǫ > 0, we can homotope F0 to a map F with k-dilation less than ǫ.
11.1. Zeldovitch’s construction of a thick tube. Our proof of the h-principle is based on
Zel’dovitch’s construction of thick tubes in B3(1). As motivation, and in order to describe the
main ideas, we outline Zel’dovitch’s construction here. Zel’dovitch was an astrophysicist who was
studying the motion of magnetized ﬂuid in neutron stars, and his physical problem led him to the
following construction. His work is described more in the paper [Ar].
We won’t use the results from this section anywhere, so we just sketch the main ideas. Zel’dovitch’s
construction gives an alternate proof of the thick tube example from Section 9.
Thick tube example in three dimensions. (Zel’dovitch) For any radius R, there is some
δ = δ(R) > 0 and a 2-expanding embedding from S1(δ) × B2(R) into the unit 3-ball.
Let {Qi} be a collection of small disjoint squares in B2(R) with side length δ, ﬁlling most of the
area of B2(R). We want to build a 2-expanding embedding from I : S1(δ) × B2(R) into B3(1).
Let’s try to ﬁrst construct I on S1(δ) × Qi. Notice that S1(δ) × Qi is basically S1(δ) × B2(δ), and
there is a 1-expanding embedding from this tube into a ball of radius ∼δ. We have ∼R2δ−2 such
tubes in S1(δ)×B2(R), and there are ∼δ−3 such balls in B3(1). We choose δ small enough so that
the number of balls is larger than the number of tubes, and then we embed each tube in a ball. In
this way we can construct a 2-expanding embedding I from ∪iS1(δ) × Qi into B3(1). We can even
arrange that I increases all areas by a factor of 10.
So far we have deﬁned I on ∪iS1(δ) × Qi. We have to extend it to an embedding on the whole
domain. Why is it possible to do this? If we let I0 be a standard embedding from S1(δ) × B2(R)
into the 3-ball (unknotted and with twisting number zero), then the images of the small tubes will
be unlinked, and we can isotope I0 to our embedding I : ∪iS1(δ) × Qi →B3(1). Therefore, our
map I extends to some embedding from S1(δ) × B2(R) →B3(1).
This embedding I is 2-expanding on ∪iS1(δ)×Qi, but it has terrible properties on the complement
of this region.
We call the complement of ∪iS1(δ) × Qi the interstitial region.
Since I is an
embedding, there is some number β(I) > 0 so that each surface of area A in the domain is mapped
to a surface of area ≥β(I)A, but we have no estimate for β(I). We can ﬁx this problem by squeezing
the interstital region in the following way.
For any ǫ > 0, there is a diﬀeomorphism Ψǫ : S1(δ) × B2(R) →S1(ǫδ) × B2(R) with Lipschitz
constant ≤2 and with 2-dilation ≲ǫ on the interstitial region. This diﬀeomorphism is just a product
of a map in each factor. The map on the circle is just a rescaling. In the map B2(R) →B2(R), the
squares Qi grow a bit, and the interstitial region between them shrinks to a very thin neighborhood
of a graph.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
57
If we choose ǫ small enough, then I ◦Ψ−1
ǫ
: S1(ǫδ) × B2(R) →B3(1) will be a 2-expanding
embedding. If we take a small surface in ∪iS1(δ) × Qi, then Ψ−1
ǫ
doesn’t compress areas by more
than a factor of 22 = 4, and I expands areas by a factor of 10. If we take a small surface in
the interstitial region with area A, then I ◦Ψ−1
ǫ
maps the surface to an image with area at least
β(I)ǫ−1A. As long as we choose ǫ small enough, we are done.
Next we ask if we can construct an embedding with non-zero twisting number. Here the answer is
no. The problem is that in an embedding with non-zero twisting number the images of the smaller
tubes S1(δ)×Qi would have to be linked with each other, and so they couldn’t lie in diﬀerent balls.
But in dimension m ≥4, the smaller tubes would be unlinked and the construction above would
go through, giving an (m-1)-expanding embedding. If m ≥4, then for every R > 1, there is some
δ(R), and an (m−1)-expanding embedding from S1(δ)×Bm−1(R) into Bm(1) with twisting number
1. Now using this thick tube and the Pontryagin-Thom collapse, we get homotopically non-trivial
maps from Sm to Sm−1 with arbitrarily small (m −1)-dilation.
In the proof of the h-principle, we will generalize this method. Instead of S1 × Bm−1, we will
work more generally with Y ×Bn for an (m−n)-dimesional manifold Y . Instead of a union of cubes
∪iQi - which is a neighborhood of a 0-dimensional polyhedron – we will work with neighborhoods
of higher dimensional polyhedra in Bn.
11.2. An outline of the proof. We will construct a degree 1 map Ψ : Sn →Sn, and a degree 1
map G : Sm →Sm, and the map F will be Ψ◦F0◦G. Since degree 1 maps of spheres are homotopic
to the identity, we see that G and Ψ are each homotopic to the identity, and so F is homotopic to
F0. By choosing G and Ψ judiciously, we will arrange that Dilk(F) < ǫ.
Our construction depends on a small parameter δ > 0. The maps Ψ and G depend on δ, and
so the ﬁnal map F depends on δ. We will show that as δ →0, Dilk(F) →0 also. We have to
keep track of how the dilations and other geometric quantities depend on δ. We write A ≲B if
A ≤C(F0)B, where C(F0) is a constant that may depend on the map F0 but does not depend on
δ.
We can assume that F0 is smooth.
We let y0 ∈Sn be a regular value of F0.
We let Y =
F −1
0
(y0) ⊂Sm.
So Y is a submanifold of dimension m −n.
Now we let Br(y0) be the ball
around y0 with a small radius r ≳1. By choosing r appropriately small, we can be sure that
F −1
0
(Br(y0)) is diﬀeomorphic to Y × Br(y0). We can choose a map πY : F −1
0
(Br(y0)) →Y so that
πY × F0 : F −1
0
(Br(y0)) →Y × Br(y0) is a diﬀeomorphism.
Since r is small, Br(y0) is nearly Euclidean, and we choose an identiﬁcation with Bn
r ⊂Rn.
We let Qn−k ⊂Bn
r be the (n-k)-skeleton of the cubical grid with side length δ intersected with
Bn
r . (More precisely, Q is the union of all the faces of cubical grid of dimension ≤n −k which lie
entirely in Bn
r .) We let VW be the Wδ-neighborhood of Qn−k ⊂Br(y0), where W > 0 is a small
constant depending on F0 which we will choose later. The constant W will be independent of δ
and so W ≳1. Using our identiﬁcation of Bn
r with Br(y0), we can think of VW as an open subset
of Br(y0) ⊂Sn.
Now we can describe the map Ψ : Sn →Sn.
Lemma 11.1. We will construct a degree 1 map Ψ from Sn to Sn with the following properties.
On the set VW ⊂Sn, the 1-dilation of Ψ is ≲1. On the complement of VW , the k-dilation of Ψ is
identically zero. This happens because Ψ maps the complement of VW into a (k −1)-dimensional
subset of Sn.


58
LARRY GUTH
We chose the dimension of Q to be n −k in order to make this lemma work. The complement
of VW is a neighborhood of a polyhedron of dimension k −1. The map Ψ retracts the complement
of VW onto this polyhedron, while VW gets thicker in order to ﬁll the vacated region.
We deﬁne UW := F −1
0
(VW ) ⊂Sm. On the complement of UW , Lemma 11.1 implies that the
k-dilation of Ψ ◦F0 is zero. So we only have to worry about what happens on UW . We use the map
G in order to deal with this region. To explain our strategy, we need to deﬁne an auxiliary metric
on UW .
We let h0 be the unit sphere metric on Sn, and hence on VW ⊂Br(y0) ⊂Sn. We let g0 be the unit
sphere metric on Sm and gY be the restriction of g0 to Y . The set UW is diﬀeomorphic to Y × VW .
We let g1 be the metric δ2gY + h0. More precisely, the map πY × F0 is a diﬀeomorphism from UW
to Y × VW , and we deﬁne g1 so that πY × F0 is an isometry from (UW , g1) to (Y, δ2gY ) × (VW , h0).
In particular, the map F0 : (UW , g1) →(VW , h0) has 1-dilation equal to 1.
Now we are ready to describe the degree 1 map G : Sm →Sm.
Lemma 11.2. If k > (m + 1)/2, then there exists W ≳1 and a degree 1 map G from Sm to Sm
with the following property. If we view G as a map from (G−1(UW ), g0) to (UW , g1), then it has
1-dilation bounded by ≲δa for some exponent a > 0.
With these two lemmas, we prove the h-principle. We deﬁne F to be the composition Ψ ◦F0 ◦G.
Since Ψ and G are degree 1 maps of spheres, they are each homotopic to the identity and so F is
homotopic to F0. Now we estimate the k-dilation of the map F.
The k-dilation of F is the supremum of |ΛkdFx|. We consider two cases, depending on whether
x lies in G−1(UW ). If x lies in G−1(UW ), then we proceed as follows. We view F as a composition
of maps
(G−1(UW ), g0) →(UW , g1) →(VW , h0) →(Sn, h0).
(The ﬁrst map is G, the second map is F0, and the last map is Ψ.) For the ﬁrst map, the derivative
dGx has norm ≲δa by Lemma 11.2. For the second map, the norm of the derivative is ≤1 by the
deﬁnition of g1. For the third map, the norm of the derivative is ≲1 by Lemma 11.1. Therefore,
the derivative dFx has norm ≲δa. By making δ small, we can arrange that |dFx| and |ΛkdFx| are
as small as we like.
Next we consider the case that x does not lie in G−1(UW ). In this case we have no control over
dGx. But we know that G(x) does not lie in UW and so F0(G(x)) does not lie in VW . Therefore,
ΛkdΨF0(G(x)) is zero. And so ΛkdFx is zero also. In summary, in each of the two cases, |ΛkdFx| < ǫ,
and so Dilk(F) < ǫ.
Now we discuss the construction of the map G. The map G is in fact a diﬀeomorphism, and
we will construct its inverse G−1. The main task is to deﬁne G−1 on the set UW . We construct it
using the following lemma.
Lemma 11.3. If k > (m+1)/2, then there is a constant W ≳1, and an embedding I : (UW , g1) →
(Sm, g0) which is isotopic to the inclusion UW ⊂Sm, and which increases all lengths by a factor
≳δ−a. Here a = m−n
m
> 0.
Given this lemma, the construction of G is straightforward. Since I is isotopic to the inclusion
map UW ⊂Sm, we can extend I to a diﬀeomorphism from Sm to Sm. This diﬀeomorphism is G−1.
Because I is very expanding on UW , it follows that G is very contracting on G−1(UW ). So Lemma
11.3 implies Lemma 11.2.
Lemma 11.3 is the main step in the proof of the h-principle. It is proven by a quantitative
general position argument. The set UW is a small neighborhood of a polyhedron P of dimension


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
59
p = m−k. The condition k > (m+1)/2 implies that p < (m−1)/2. By a standard general position
argument, any two embeddings from P into Sm are isotopic. The quantitative embedding lemma
from Section 10 allows us to construct embeddings from neighborhoods of P with geometric control
of the embedding. With a little work, we will see that Lemma 11.3 follows from the quantitative
embedding lemma.
Before turning to the proofs, we describe the construction in a simple example, to try to help
the reader visualize the situation.
Let us suppose that k = n and that m = n + 1. Since k = n the dimension of Q is zero. So Q is
simply a grid of points with spacing δ, with a total of ∼δ−n points. The set VW is simply a union
of balls, centered at the points of Q and with radius Wδ.
Since m = n + 1, the set Y = F −1
0
(y0) is a compact 1-dimensional manifold in Sm. So Y is
a union of circles. For simplicity, let’s consider the case that Y is a single circle. The circle Y
is independent of δ, so the length of Y is ∼1. Now the set UW = F −1
0
(VW ) consists of ∼δ−n
cylinders. Each cylinder is diﬀeomorphic to S1 × Bn. Geometrically, each cylinder is roughly a
product of a circle of length ∼1 and an n-ball of radius ∼δ.
So far, we have discussed the geometry of UW in the metric g0. In the metric g1, each cylinder
is a product of a circle with length ∼δ by a ball with radius ∼δ. The metric g1 is much smaller
than g0 in the direction along the ﬁbers of F0, and it approximately agrees with g0 perpendicular
to the ﬁbers of F0.
We can construct an embedding from (UW , g1) into (Sm, g0) as follows. First ﬁnd δ−n disjoint
balls inside of (Sm, g0). Each ball will have radius ∼δ
n
n+1 . Embed each tube of (UW , g1) into one
of these balls. In the metric g1, the tube has length ∼δ and thickness ∼δ. But in the target ball,
the image will be a tube of length ∼δ
n
n+1 and thickness ∼δ
n
n+1 . Therefore, the embedding can
expand all lengths by a factor ∼δ−
1
n+1 as desired.
So far this discussion works for any n ≥2. We still need to make sure that our embedding is
isotopic to the inclusion UW ⊂Sm. Here we will see a diﬀerence between the case n = 2 and the
case n ≥3. In the case n = 2, if the map F0 : S3 →S2 has non-zero Hopf invariant, then the
tubes of UW are all linked with each other. In the embedding from the last paragraph, the tubes
are mapped into disjoint balls, and so their images are unlinked. Therefore, the embedding is not
isotopic to the identity. (In this case, k = (m + 1)/2, and the hypotheses of Lemma 11.3 are not
satisﬁed.) But when n = 3, this obstruction disappears because tubes in S4 cannot be linked. We
still need to arrange that on each tube individually, the embedding we construct is isotopic to the
inclusion, but this turns out to be reasonably straightforward. The key point is that 1-dimensional
curves in S3 can be linked, but 1-dimensional curves in S4 cannot be.
At this point, we can say more about how general position arguments are relevant to our problem.
Recall that the set VW is a small neighborhood of a polyhedron Q of dimension n−k. The set UW :=
F −1
0
(VW ) is a small neighborhood of a polyhedron P = Y ×Q of dimension (m−n)+(n−k) = m−k.
Let p = m −k be the dimension of P. The hypothesis of our construction is that k > (m + 1)/2,
which is equivalent to p < (m −1)/2. So our set UW is a small neighborhood of a polyhedron of
dimension p < (m −1)/2. The quantitative general position arguments from the last section show
that, because of the dimension condition p < (m −1)/2, the set UW ⊂Sm may be isotoped rather
freely.
For our particular application, we want to perform a certain type of isotopy. Recall that F0 :
UW →VW is a submersion with ﬁbers diﬀeomorphic to Y . We want to isotope UW so that the
cross-section grows while allowing the ﬁbers to shrink. In the example above, UW is a union of
tubes of length ∼1 and radius ∼δ. The ﬁber is a circle of length ∼1 and the cross-section is an


60
LARRY GUTH
(m −1)-ball of radius ∼δ. We described how to isotope these tubes so that the cross-section grows
from radius ∼δ to radius ∼δ
n−1
n . The isotopy also shrinks the length of the ﬁbers from ∼1 to
∼δ
n−1
n . Lemma 11.3 generalizes this construction to all dimensions, as long as k > (m + 1)/2.
11.3. The squeezing map. In this section, we prove Lemma 11.1. First we recall the statement.
We will construct a degree 1 map Ψ from Sn to Sn with the following properties. On the set
VW ⊂Sn, the 1-dilation of Ψ is ≲1. On the complement of VW , the k-dilation of Ψ is identically
zero. This happens because Ψ maps the complement of VW into a (k −1)-dimensional subset of Sn.
Proof. We begin by constructing a squeezing map in the setting of the cubical lattice in Rn. Let
Σ be the unit cubical lattice in Rn. Let ¯Σ denote the dual polyhedral structure to Σ. So there
is a vertex of ¯Σ in the center of each n-cube of Σ, and there is an edge of ¯Σ perpendicular to
each (n −1)-face of Σ, etc. So ¯Σ is also a unit cubical lattice, shifted by (1/2, ..., 1/2) relative to
Σ. We let Σd denote the d-skeleton of Σ and ¯Σd denote the d-skeleton of ¯Σ. The key point of
our construction is that the complement of Σn−k retracts to ¯Σk−1. The next lemma gives a more
quantitative version of this fact.
Lemma 11.4. For any W > 0, there is a Zn-periodic map R from Rn to Rn with the following
properties:
• R maps the complement of the W-neighborhood of Σn−k to ¯Σk−1,
• For any point y ∈Rn, |R(y) −y| ≤C(W),
• Dil1 R ≤C(W).
Proof. We will work on the torus T n = Rn/Zn. Because Σ and ¯Σ are periodic, they descend to
polyhedral structures on the torus, which we call Σper and ¯Σper. Now T n \ Σn−k
per
deformation
retracts to ¯Σk−1
per . By the homotopy extension property, we can homotope the identity map to a
smooth map Rper which retracts the complement of the W-neighborhood of Σn−k
per to ¯Σk−1
per . Then
we lift Rper to a Zn-periodic map R from Rn to itself.
The ﬁrst property follows because Rper maps T n \ NW (Σn−k
per ) to ¯Σk−1
per . The second property
follows because Rper is homotopic to the identity. The last property follows because Rper is a
smooth map on a compact manifold.
□
The map R “squeezes” Rn \NW (Σn−k) into ¯Σk−1, and it expands NW (Σn−k) to ﬁll in the space.
We are going to do the same thing at a small scale δ on the sphere Sn. First we switch scales.
We let Σδ be the cubical lattice of side length δ in Rn, we let ¯Σδ be the dual structure, and so
on. By just rescaling the lemma above we get the following.
Lemma 11.5. Let W > 0 be ﬁxed independent of δ. Then for each δ > 0, there is a δZn-periodic
map Rδ from Rn to Rn with the following properties:
• Rδ maps the complement of the Wδ-neighborhood of Σn−k
δ
to ¯Σk−1
δ
,
• For any point y ∈Rn, |Rδ(y) −y| ≲δ,
• Dil1 Rδ ≲1.
Finally, we adapt this squeezing map from Rn to the unit sphere Sn. Recall that Br(y0) ⊂Sn is
close to Euclidean because we can assume that r ≤1/10. We use the exponential map to identify
Br(y0) with Bn
r ⊂Rn. Recall that Qn−k ⊂Bn
r is just the union of all faces of Σn−k inside of Bn
r .
Recall that VW ⊂Bn
r is just the Wδ-neighborhood of Q. Since Bn
r is identiﬁed with Br(y0), we
can also think of VW as a subset of Br(y0) ⊂Sn.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
61
We are now ready to construct the map Ψ. Let B′ = Br/4(y0), which we identify with Bn
r/4 ⊂Rn.
Let Φ : Sn →Sn be a degree 1 map which collapses Sn \ B′ to a point q. We deﬁne Ψ as follows.
• If y ∈3B′, then Ψ(y) = Φ ◦Rδ(y).
• If y /∈3B′, then Ψ(y) = q.
First we check that these deﬁnitions match up to give a globally deﬁned smooth map. We should
say a bit more about the deﬁnition in the ﬁrst case. If δ > 0 is small enough, then Rδ maps Bn
3r/4
into Bn
r ; so by a slight abuse of notation we can think of it as a map from 3B′ into Br(y0) ⊂Sn.
The deﬁnitions match because if y lies in 3B′ \ 2B′, then Rδ(y) maps y to the complement of B′,
and so Φ ◦Rδ(y) = q.
We check that Ψ has degree 1. We let Rt,δ(y) = (1 −t)Rδ(y) + ty be a straight-line homotopy
from Rδ to the identity. We deﬁne Ψt by replacing Rδ with Rt,δ in the deﬁnition above. Each Rt,δ
obeys the displacement bound |Rt,δ(y) −y| ≲δ, and so the argument above shows that Ψt is a
continous family of maps. Therefore, Ψ is homotopic to Φ and has degree 1.
Next we check the geometric properties of Ψ. Since Rδ and Φ each have 1-dilation ≲1, we see
that Ψ has 1-dilation ≲1. Suppose that y is in the complement of VW . We have to check that
ΛkdΨy = 0. If y does not lie in 2B′, then Ψ collapses a neighborhood of y to a point, and so
dΨy = 0. Suppose y lies in 2B′ but not in VW . After identifying Br(y0) with Bn
r , y lies in Bn
r/2 but
not in NWδΣn−k
δ
. Therefore, Rδ maps a neighborhood of y to the (k −1)-dimensional polyhedron
¯Σk−1
δ
. Therefore, ΛkdRδ,y = 0, and so ΛkdΨy = 0 as well.
□
11.4. Quantitative embedding. Now we show that Lemma 11.3 follows from the quantitative
embedding lemma in the last section. First we recall the statement of Lemma 11.3.
If k > (m + 1)/2, then there is a constant W ≳1, and an embedding I : (UW , g1) →(Sm, g0)
which is isotopic to the inclusion UW ⊂Sm, and which increases all lengths by a factor ≳δ−a.
Here a = m−n
m
> 0.
Now we give the proof of Lemma 11.3.
Proof. In order to apply the quantitative embedding lemma, we need to deﬁne, M, P, N, I0, etc.
We let M be Br(y0) × Y . Recall that h0 is the unit sphere metric on Br(y0) ⊂Sn, and that gY
is the metric on Y ⊂Sm induced from the unit sphere metric of Sm. Recall that g1 is deﬁned to
be h0 + δ2gY . The volume of (M, g1) is ∼δm−n. We rescale the metric to have volume ∼1: we let
g = δ−2 m−n
n g1 = δ−2ag1. We have now deﬁned (M, g).
We recall that Q ⊂Br(y0) is the (n-k)-skeleton of a cubical lattice with spacing δ (with respect
to the metric h0). We recall that P = Q×Y ⊂Br(y0)×Y = M. After picking a triangulation of Y ,
we can view P as a polyhedron embedded in M. The pair P ⊂(M, g1) has bounded local geometry
at scale δ. (In fact, the local geometry of the P ⊂(M, g1) at scale δ is essentially independent of δ.
In other words, if we take any δ > 0, and then look at a δ-neighborhood in (M, g1) and rescale it
to size 1, the result will be essentially independent of δ.) After rescaling, we see that P ⊂(M, g)
has bounded geometry at scale s = δ−aδ = δ1−a.
Because k > (m + 1)/2, we recall that p = Dim P < (m −1)/2. (To check this, note that Q was
has dimension n −k, Y has dimension m −n, and so p = (n −k) + (m −n) = m −k.)
The target N is just (Sm, g0), which has bounded geometry at scale 1.


62
LARRY GUTH
Recall that F0 × πY : F −1
0
(Br(y0)) →Br(y0) × Y is a diﬀeomorphism.
The inverse of this
diﬀeomorphism is our embedding I′ : M →N. (We have M = Br(y0)×Y →F −1
0
(Br(y0)) ⊂Sm =
N.)
It remains to construct a 1-Lipschitz map I0 : (M, g) →(Sm, g0) which maps at most µ ≲1
vertices of P into any ball of radius s in (Sm, g0). Geometrically, the Y -factor in (M, g) is very
small, and so (M, g) looks essentially like an n-dimensional disk of radius δ−a = δ−1s. As our
mapping, we fold up this disk inside of (Sm, g0) = N.
Here are the details. We begin with the projection πB : M = Br(y0) × Y →Br(y0). Recall that
the metric g is a product metric g = δ−2ah0 + δ2−2agY . So πB : (M, g) →(Br(y0), δ−2ah0) has
Lipschitz constant 1. Now (Br(y0), δ−2ah0) is bilipschitz equivalent to a Euclidean ball of radius
δ−a = δ−1s (and the bilipschitz constant is ≲1). So up to a controlled bilipschitz error, we can
identify (Br(y0), δ−2ah0) with the Euclidean ball Bn(δ−1s).
Next we want to fold up this n-ball inside of (Sm, g0). To fold it up in a useful way, we consider
the product Bn(δ−1s) × [−s, s]m−n, which is an m-dimensional convex set with volume ∼1. It
admits an embedding i0 into a hemisphere of (Sm, g0) with bilipschitz constant ≲1. (For the details
of this embedding, see the appendix in Section 14.2.) By a slight rescaling, we can arrange that
i0 : (Br(y0), δ−2ah0) →(Sm, g0) has Lipschitz constant ≤1. Now we deﬁne I0 = i0 ◦πB. The map
I0 : M →N has Lipschitz constant ≤1.
We have to check that I0 maps µ ≲1 vertices of P into each ball of radius s in N = (Sm, g0).
If B(s) is a ball of radius s in (Sm, g0), then i−1
0 (B(s)) is contained in ≲1 balls of radius ≲s in
(Br(y0), δ−2ah0). Since (Y, δ2−2agY ) has diameter ≲s, the preimage π−1
B
of a ball of radius ≲s in
(Br(y0), δ−2ah0) is contained in a ball of radius ≲s in (M, g). Therefore, I−1
0 (B(s)) is contained
in ≲1 balls of radius ≲s in (M, g). Since P ⊂(M, g) has uniformly bounded local geometry at
scale s, we see that I−1
0 (B(s)) contains µ ≲1 vertices of P.
Finally, we have to deﬁne T0. Without loss of generality, we can assume that F −1
0
(Br(y0)) =
I′(M) is contained in a hemisphere of (Sm, g0), and that I0 : M →(Sm, g0) is contained in the
same hemisphere. We let Nhemi ⊂N be this hemisphere. The tangent bundle of the hemisphere
Nhemi is trivial. We pick a particular trivialization by doing parallel transport on the geodesics
to the pole, and we get a trivialization map TrivN : T Nhemi →Rm, which is an isometry on each
tangent space. Also |∇TrivN | ≲1. We would like to also ﬁnd a trivialization of T M. One option
is to take TrivN ◦dI′ : T M →Rm. This is a trivialization, but the map on each tangent space is
far from an isometry, because the map I′ : (M, g) →(N, h) is far from an isometry. Recall that
T M = T Y ⊕T Br(y0). Let S : T M →T M be the map that multiplies each vector in the Y -direction
by δ1−a and each vector in the Br(y0)-direction by δ−a. Then dI′ ◦S : T M →T N has bilipschitz
constant ≲1 (at each point of M). We deﬁne TrivM = TrivN ◦dI′ ◦S. It has bilipschitz constant
≲1 on each tangent space. With these two trivializations, we can deﬁne a ﬁberwise isomorphism
T0 : T M →T N covering I0 as the unique map that commutes with the two trivializations. In other
words, if x ∈M and v ∈TxM, then
T0(x, v) =

I0(x), (TrivN
I0(x))−1  TrivM
x v

.
Because both trivializations are bilipschitz, the map T0 has ﬁberwise bilipschitz constant ≲1.
We have to show that our T0 is homotopic to dI′ in the category of ﬁberwise isomorphisms.
Because I0 and I′ both map M to a contractible hemisphere, they are homotopic. So we may
homotope T0 to


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
63

I′(x), (TrivN
I′(x))−1  TrivM
x v

=
(I′(x), dI′ ◦S(x, v)) .
To ﬁnish, we may homotope S to the identity, and thus homotope this last map to dI′.
Finally, we have to check that T0 does not oscillate too rapidly – in particular that s|∇T0| ≲1.
Roughly speaking, if distg(x1, x2) = d, then the distance in (Sm, g0) from I′(x1) to I′(x2) is
≲s−1d, and so the change between T0(x1) and T0(x2) is ≲s−1d also. Therefore, s|∇T0| ≲1.
Here are more details. We have T0 a bundle map from (T M, g) to (T N, h = g0). Each bundle is
equipped with a metric and a connection, and so we can deﬁne ∇T0 and |∇T0|.
We have T0(x, v) =

I0(x), (TrivN
I0(x))−1  TrivM
x v

. The ﬁrst component I0(x) is harmless,
because I0 : (M, g) →(N, h) has |∇I0| ≲1.
We concentrate on the second component.
The
trivialization TrivN is also harmless since we have |∇TrivN | ≲1.
So it suﬃces to check that
|∇TrivM | ≲s−1. We recall that
TrivM := TrivN ◦dI′ ◦S.
To analyze this composition, we have to think about the domain and range of each map in the
right way, as follows:
S : (T M, g) →(T M, gY ⊕h0),
dI′ : (T M, gY ⊕h0) →(T N, h),
TrivN : (T N, h) →Rm.
Each of the spaces in the list above is a bundle equipped with a metric and a corresponding
connection. (If we like, Rm is a trivial bundle over a point.) Using the relevant metrics, we can
deﬁne the operator norm of S, dI′, and TrivN, and they are all ≲1. Using the relevant metrics and
connections, we can deﬁne ∇S, ∇dI′, and ∇TrivN. They are each quite nice. The ﬁrst of them,
∇S, is identically zero. This is because the splitting T M = T Y ⊕T Br(y0) is parallel with respect
to both gY ⊕h0 and g = δ2−2agY ⊕δ−2ah0. The other two obey |∇dI′| ≲1 and |∇TrivN | ≲1,
since after all neither of these tensors depends on δ. Just to be clear, when we say |∇dI′| ≲1, this
means that if v is a tangent vector in T M, then |∇vdI′| ≲|v|gY ⊕h0. Finally we expand ∇v TrivM
using the Leibniz rule:
∇v TrivM = ∇dI′(v) TrivN ◦dI′ ◦S + TrivN ◦∇vdI′ ◦S + TrivN ◦dI′ ◦∇vS.
The last term is just 0.
Since the operators are all bounded and |∇TrivN | and |∇dI′| are
bounded, we see that the norm of this expression is bounded by
|dI′(v)|h + |v|gY ⊕h0 ≲s−1|v|g.
In summary, we have shown that |∇v TrivM | ≲s−1|v|g which is equivalent to |∇TrivM | ≲s−1.
We have now checked all the hypotheses of the quantitative embedding lemma, and we may
apply it to ﬁnish the proof of Lemma 11.3. The quantitative embedding lemma gives us an L-
bilipschitz embedding I : (UW , g) →(Sm, g0) isotopic to I′ with W ≳1, L ≲1. In the context of
the quantitative embedding lemma, UW is deﬁned to be the Ws-neighborhood of P ⊂(M, g). But


64
LARRY GUTH
this deﬁnition agrees with the previous deﬁnition of UW as VW × Y . The embedding I′ : UW →Sm
is just the inclusion map, and so I is isotopic to the inclusion. Finally, if we use the metric g1 = δ2ag
on UW , then we see that the embedding I from (UW , g1) into (Sm, g0) expands all lengths by a
factor ≳δ−a as desired.
□
This ﬁnishes the proof of Lemma 11.3, and hence the proof of the h-principle for k-dilation.
12. Some previous lower bounds for k-dilation
For context, we recall here several approaches to get lower bounds on k-dilation of maps from
the unit m-sphere to the unit n-sphere. There are very few known techniques for this problem.
The most basic estimates for k-dilation have to do with k-dimensional homology.
Suppose
F : (M, g) →(N, h). If Σk is a k-dimensional surface in M, then by deﬁnition Volk(F(Σ)) ≤
Dilk(F) Volk(Σ). This estimate passes to homology. For example, we can assign a volume to a class
h ∈Hk(M; Z) as the smallest k-dimensional volume (or mass) of a cycle z in the class h. Then
Volk(F∗(h)) ≤Dilk(F) Volk(h). This argument implies that a degree D map from the unit n-sphere
to itself has n-dilation at least |D|, which is sharp.
If m > n, then maps from Sm to Sn are homologically trivial, and this simple method doesn’t
give any information. The next homotopy classes that were studied were classes with non-zero Hopf
invariant. These homotopy classes are well-understood by the following theorem.
Hopf invariant inequality. ([GMS], pages 358-359) Let F be a map from S4n−1 to S2n. Then
the norm of the Hopf invariant of F is bounded by C(n) Dil2n(F)2. Since the Hopf invariant is an
integer, any map with non-zero Hopf invariant has 2n-dilation at least C(n)−1/2.
Proof. Let ω be a 2n-form on S2n with
R
ω = 1. The pullback F ∗(ω) is a closed 2n-form on S4n−1.
Since H2n(S4n−1) = 0, this form is exact. We let PF ∗(ω) denote any primitive of F ∗(ω). Then
the Hopf invariant of F is equal to
R
S4n−1 PF ∗(ω) ∧F ∗(ω).
We take ω to be a multiple of the volume form, so |ω| < C at every point of S2n. The norm
of F ∗(ω) is bounded by C Dil2n(F) pointwise. Therefore, the L2 norm of F ∗(ω) is bounded by
C Dil2n(F).
Using Hodge theory, we can choose PF ∗(ω) to be perpendicular to all of the exact (2n −1)-
forms. For this choice, the L2 norm of PF ∗(ω) is bounded by λ−1/2∥F ∗ω∥2, where λ is the smallest
eigenvalue of the Laplacian on exact (2n)-forms. The eigenvalue λ is greater than zero and depends
only on n. Finally, the norm of the Hopf invariant is bounded by |F ∗(ω)|L2|PF ∗(ω)|L2, which is
bounded by C(n) Dil2n(F)2.
□
The 2-dilation for k = 2 has stronger properties than for k > 2, and there are several special
techniques for dealing with it. The most important result in this direction is the theorem of Tsui
and Wang mentioned in the introduction.
Tsui-Wang inequality. (Tsui and Wang, [TW]) Let F be a C1 map from Sm to Sn, where m ≥2.
If the 2-dilation of F is less than 1, then F is nullhomotopic.
The proof by Tsui and Wang uses the mean curvature ﬂow to deform the graph of the map F
as a submanifold of Sm × Sn. They prove that the mean curvature ﬂow converges to the graph
of a constant function and that at each time t the ﬂowed submanifold is the graph of a map Ft.
Therefore, Ft provides a homotopy from F to a constant map.
In [GCC] (page 179), Gromov proved a slightly weaker theorem in the same spirit. For each
m and n, there exists a number ǫ(m, n) > 0, so that any C1 map from Sm to Sn with 2-dilation


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
65
less than ǫ(m, n) is null-homotopic. The proof is based on the uniformization theorem and the
borderline Sobolev inequality. Here is a sketch of the proof. We view the map from Sm to Sn as a
family of maps from S2 to Sn, parametrized by Bm−2, where the maps at the boundary of Bm−2
are constant maps. Let’s call the family Fa : S2 →Sn, where a ∈Bm−2. If the 2-dilation of the
original map is less than ǫ, then each image Fa(S2) has area less than 4πǫ. We change coordinates
on each copy of S2 using the uniformization theorem, so each map Fa becomes conformal. With
care, this can be done in a way that is continuous in a. After the change of coordinates, we get
a (homotopic) map ˜Fa : S2 →Sn, where each map ˜Fa has Dirichlet energy less than Cǫ. By the
borderline Sobolev inequality, each map ˜Fa has BMO norm ≲ǫ. To deﬁne the BMO norm, we
think of ˜Fa as a map from S2 to Rn+1. Let B be any ball in S2. Let Ma(B) be the mean value of
˜Fa on B. The bordeline Sobolev inequality says that the mean value of | ˜Fa −Ma(B)| on the ball B
is ≲ǫ. Now ˜Fa maps S2 into Sn ⊂Rn+1. There is no reason that Ma(B) must lie in Sn. But the
last inequality implies that Ma(B) is rather close to ˜Fa(x) for many points x ∈B. In particular,
it implies that Ma(B) is ≲ǫ from Sn. Now we can homotope ˜Fa to a constant map by averaging
over balls of radius r and sending r from 0 to π/2. This homotopy depends continuously on a. The
homotopy does not lie in Sn, but the BMO inequality tells us that it lies in the Cǫ-neighborhood
of Sn. As long as Cǫ < 1/2, we can modify the homotopy to lie entirely in Sn. In summary, we get
a homotopy from our original map to a new map that factors through Bm−2 and so is contractible.
The following result of Joe Coﬀey (unpublished) is also relevant to 2-dilation.
Proposition 12.1. The space of non-surjective pointed maps from S2 to S2 has vanishing homotopy
groups.
Sketch.
Let MapNS(S2, S2) be the space of non-surjective maps from S2 to S2, taking the
base point of the domain to the basepoint of the range. Let X ⊂S2 be a ﬁnite subset, and let
MapX ⊂MapNS(S2, S2) be the set of maps from S2 to S2 which do not contain X in their image.
The ﬁrst key point is that MapX is contractible.
This happens because the universal cover of
S2 \ X is contractible. The space MapNS(S2, S2) is the union ∪p∈S2 Mapp. Each of the sets Mapp
is contractible. Any ﬁnite interesction ∩I
i=1 Mappi is the space MapX for X = ∪pi, and so it is
contractible. Now by a standard argument with nerves, any ﬁnite union ∪I
i=1 Mappi is contractible.
The sets Mapp are also open. Therefore, if f : Sp →MapNS(S2, S2) is a continuous map, the image
f(Sp) lies in a ﬁnite union of sets Mapp. Therefore, f is contractible. By this argument, all the
homotopy groups of MapNS(S2, S2) vanish. This ﬁnishes the sketch of the proof.
As a corollary, we see that every map from the unit m-sphere to the unit 2-sphere with 2-dilation
< 1 is contractible, recovering a special case of the theorem of Tsui and Wang.
These three techniques give strong results about 2-dilation, but they haven’t yet led to any
results about k-dilation for k ≥3. Can the mean curvature ﬂow shed any light on k-dilation for
k ≥3? The Riemann mapping theorem seems inherently two-dimensional. Coﬀey’s proof uses
the fact that the complement of a ﬁnite (non-empty) set in S2 is aspherical. This fact is special
to two dimensions. But studying the space of non-surjective maps may yield some results in any
dimension. Let MapNS(Sn, Sn) denote the space of non-surjective basepoint-preserving maps from
Sn to Sn. Clearly MapNS(Sn, Sn) ⊂Map(Sn, Sn). This inclusion induces a map of homotopy
groups
πq(MapNS(Sn, Sn)) →πq(Map(Sn, Sn)) = πn+q(Sn).
If a ∈πn+q(Sn) can be realized by maps with n-dilation < 1, then a will lie in the image
of πq(MapNS(Sn, Sn).
Other than Coﬀey’s theorem, I don’t know of any example where this


66
LARRY GUTH
image has been calculated. For example, it would be interesting to know whether the image of
π3(MapNS(S4, S4)) in π7(S4) contains classes with non-zero Hopf invariant.
There is another basic fact about k-dilation which is relevant to our discussion. This result has
to do with the C0 limits of maps with bounded k-dilation. It appears as an exercise in [GPDR]
(page 23, exercise B3).
Proposition 12.2. Suppose that Fi : Bm →Rn is a sequence of C1 maps from the unit m-ball to
Rn, where each map has k-dilation ≤1. Suppose that Fi converges in C0 to a limit F. If F is C1
then Dilk(F) ≤1. In fact, if F is just diﬀerentiable at one point x, then Dilk(dFx) ≤1.
We begin with the following special case.
Lemma 12.3. Let Fi : ¯Bk →Rk be a sequence of maps from the closed k-ball to Rk that converges
in C0 to a linear map L. If Dilk(Fi) ≤1, then Dilk(L) ≤1.
Proof. The key point is the following. If |Fi −L|C0 ≤ǫ, then Fi(Bk) must cover L(Bk) except
for the ǫ-neighborhood of L(Sk−1). This fact is well-known but not completely elementary. It
follows from Brouwer’s theory of degrees and winding numbers. If y is contained in L(Bk), then
the winding number of L : Sk−1 →Rk \ {y} is equal to 1. We make a straight-line homotopy from
L to Fi. If y is not in the ǫ-neighborhood of L(Sk−1), then this homotopy never hits y, and so
Fi : Sk−1 →Rk \ {y} has winding number 1. Therefore, Fi(Bk) must cover y.
Taking ǫ →0, we see that Volk L(Bk) ≤lim supi Volk Fi(Bk) ≤Volk(Bk), and so Dilk(L) ≤
1.
□
By scaling the domain and the range, the unit k-ball may easily be replaced by a ball of any
radius r > 0.
Now we turn to the general proposition, which follows from the lemma and some rescaling.
Proof. We do a proof by contradiction. Suppose that x0 is a point where F is diﬀerentiable, and
dFx0 has k-dilation > 1. By translating, we can assume without loss of generality that x0 = 0 and
F(x0) = 0. Next, let P k ⊂Rm be a k-plane through 0, so that the k-dilation of dF0 restricted to
P is > 1. Let Qk = dF0(P k), a k-plane in Rn. By taking a subsequence of the Fi, we can arrange
that |Fi(x) −F(x)| < 3−i for all x in the unit ball and all i ≥1. Now we consider a sequence of
maps Gi from P to Q made by scaling down, applying Fi, projecting onto Q, and scaling back up.
If πQ denotes the orthogonal projection from Rn to Q, we can write Gi by the formula
Gi(x) = 2iπQ
 Fi(x/2i))

.
The maps Gi all have k-dilation ≤1.
Next, let Hi(x) be deﬁned by using F in place of Fi in the deﬁnition of Gi:
Hi(x) = 2iπQ
 F(x/2i))

.
Since F is diﬀerentiable at 0, the maps Hi converge locally in C0 to the linear map dF0.
If |x| ≤1, then |Gi(x) −Hi(x)| ≤2i|Fi(x2−i) −F(x2−i)| ≤(3/2)−i. Therefore, the maps Gi
converge to dF0 in C0 on the unit ball.
Since Dilk(Gi) ≤1, the lemma implies that dF0 has
k-dilation ≤1.
□
As far as I know, all the proofs of Proposition 12.2 need degree theory or a similar contribution
from topology. For perspective on the role of topology, consider the following counterexample.
Suppose that Fi : R2 →R2 is a sequence of C1 maps (or even smooth maps). Suppose that at each


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
67
point, each derivative dFi has singular values s1 ≤s2 obeying the inequality s1/2
1
s2 ≤1. Roughly
speaking, this means that Fi is allowed to stretch space in one direction by a factor Λ > 1 as long
as it shrinks in the perpendicular direction by a factor Λ2. It turns out that C0 limits of the Fi do
not have to obey the same condition on singular values. For example, let B > 1 be any number,
and let L be the linear map L(x1, x2) = (x1/B, Bx2). The map L has singular values s1 = B−1
and s2 = B. Therefore, s1(L)1/2s2(L) = B1/2, which can be arbitrarily large. Nevertheless, for any
B > 1, there exists a sequence of maps Fi : R2 →R2 which obey the condition s1/2
1
s2 ≤1 pointwise
and converge to L in C0. This construction is described in Appendix A of [GUT].
13. Open problems
The main question we considered in the paper was the following. Fix a homotopy class a ∈
πm(Sn) and an integer k.
Can the class a be realized by a sequence of maps Fj : Sm →Sn
with Dilk(Fj) →0? This question was previously understood for maps of non-zero degree or non-
zero Hopf invariant. Our main theorem answers this question for the non-zero homotopy class in
πm(Sm−1) when m ≥4. There are a few other cases where the answer is known, especially in low
dimensions, but the question is open for most homotopy classes.
To give some perspective, we record here what we know about some low-dimensional homotopy
groups of spheres. We use the lists of homotopy groups of spheres and the suspension maps between
them given in [T] on pages 39-42. By the theorem of Tsui and Wang, no homotopy class can be
realized with arbitrarily small 2-dilation. For maps a ∈πm(S2), this theorem completely answers
our question. In the next few paragraphs, we consider a few homotopy groups of S3, S4, and S5.
We start with the homotopy groups of S3. No homotopy class can be realized with arbitrarily
small 2-dilation. The group π4(S3) is isomorphic to Z2, and the non-trivial element is the suspension
of the Hopf ﬁbration. By the suspension construction, it can be realized with arbitrarily small 3-
dilation. The group π5(S3) is also isomorphic to Z2, and the non-trivial element is the suspension
of an element from π4(S2). By the suspension construction, it can be realized with arbitrarily
small 3-dilation. The group π6(S3) is isomorphic to Z12. One non-trivial element of π6(S3) is a
suspension of an element from π5(S2). This one element can be realized by maps with arbitrarily
small 3-dilation. For the other (non-zero) elements of π6(S3), it is an open question whether they
can be realized with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
We next consider the homotopy groups of S4. The group π5(S4) is isomorphic to Z2. Our main
theorem says that the non-trivial class can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation but
not arbitrarily small 3-dilation. The group π6(S4) is also isomorphic to Z2. The non-trivial element
is the double suspension of a class from π4(S2). By the suspension construction, it can be realized
by maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation. I don’t know whether it can be realized with arbitrarily
small 3-dilation. The group π7(S4) is isomorphic to Z ⊕Z12. The elements with non-trivial Hopf
invariant cannot be realized with arbitrarily small 4-dilation. The other elements are suspensions
of elements in π6(S3). By the suspension construction, they can be realized with arbitrarily small
4-dilation. One element is a double suspension of an element in π5(S2). It can be realized with
arbitrarily small 3-dilation. I don’t know whether the other torsion elements can be realized by
maps with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
Finally, we consider some homotopy groups of S5.
The group π6(S5) is isomorphic to Z2.
Our main theorem says that the non-trivial class can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small
4-dilation but not arbitrarily small 3-dilation. The group π7(S5) is isomorphic to Z2, and the non-
trivial element is the triple suspension of an element in π4(S2). By the suspension construction it
can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation. I don’t know whether it can be realized


68
LARRY GUTH
by maps with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
The group π8(S5) is isomorphic to Z24.
By the h-
principle, every class can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 5-dilation. The classes with
non-zero Steenrod-Hopf invariant cannot be realized with arbitrarily small 4-dilation. These classes
correspond to the odd numbers in Z24.
The other classes are all double suspensions of classes
in π6(S3), and one class (the class corresponding to the number 12) is the triple suspension of a
class in π5(S2). The suspension construction implies that the triple suspension can be realized by
maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation. I don’t know whether any of the double suspensions can
be realized with arbitrarily small 4-dilation, or whether any non-trivial map can be realized with
arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
We also brieﬂy consider the homotopy groups of small codimension. For m ≥4, πm(Sm−1) = Z2.
Our main theorem says that the non-trivial class can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-
dilation if and only if k > (m + 1)/2. Next we consider the group πm(Sm−2). The homotopy group
πm(Sm−2) is equal to Z2 for all m ≥4, and the suspension is an isomorphism. The suspension
construction implies that the non-trivial class can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-
dilation for all k > m/2. (This improves slightly on the h-principle, which imples that the non-
trivial class can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation for all k > (m + 1)/2.) By
the Tsui-Wang theorem, we know that none of these classes can be realized with arbitrarily small
2-dilation. But we don’t know a lower bound on the 3-dilation for any of these classes. The group
πm(Sm−3) is isomorphic to Z24 for all m ≥8. By the h-principle, any of these elements can be
realized with arbitrarily small k-dilation for k > (m + 1)/2. Half of the elements have non-zero
Steenrod-Hopf invariant. These elements can be realized with arbitrarily small k-dilation only if
k > (m + 1)/2, so we understand them well. The elements with zero Steenrod-Hopf invariant are
all suspensions from π6(S3). By the suspension construction, they can all be represented by maps
with arbitrarily small k-dilation for k > m/2. One of the elements is a suspension from π5(S2).
By the suspension construction, it can be represented by maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation for
k > (2/5)m.
We can use the k-dilation to deﬁne a ﬁltration on the homotopy groups of spheres. We say that
a ∈Vkπm(Sn) if the class a can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small k-dilation. It is relatively
easy to check that Vkπm(Sn) is a subgroup of πm(Sn), and that 0 = V1πm(Sn) ⊂V2πm(Sn) ⊂... ⊂
Vnπm(Sn) ⊂πm(Sn). We will give the proof below.
The deﬁnition of Vkπm(Sn) does not depend on the choice of a metric on Sm or Sn. We have
been working with the unit sphere metrics in this paper. Suppose that we choose other metrics g
on Sm and h on Sn. Let Dil(g,h)
k
(F) be the k-dilation of the map F from (Sm, g) to (Sn, h). Let g0
and h0 be the unit sphere metrics. Suppose that g is L1 bilipschitz to g0 and h is L2-bilipschitz to
h0. Then
L−k
1 L−k
2
≤Dil(g,h)
k
(F)
Dil(g0,h0)
k
(F)
≤Lk
1Lk
2.
Therefore, if Fi : Sm →Sn is a sequence of maps, then Dil(g,h)
k
(Fi) →0 if and only if Dil(g0,h0)
k
(Fi) →
0. In particular, the deﬁnition of Vkπm(Sn) is independent of the choice of metric.
We can deﬁne a similar ﬁltration on the homotopy groups of any ﬁnite simplicial complex. Let
X be a ﬁnite simplicial complex. Equip each simplex with the standard metric. Then we say that
a ∈πm(X) belongs to Vkπm(X) if there are maps Fi : Sm →X in the homotopy class a with
Dilk(Fi) →0. The Vkπm(X) form a ﬁltration of πm(X): they are each subgroups of πm(X), with
0 = V1πm(X) ⊂V2πm(X) ⊂... ⊂Vmπm(X) ⊂πm(X).


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
69
Lemma 13.1. The set Vkπm(X) is a subgroup of πm(X).
Proof. If a lies in Vkπm(X), then let fi be a sequence of maps from Sm to X in the homotopy class
a with k-dilation tending to zero. Let I be a reﬂection, mapping Sm to itself with degree -1, and
taking the basepoint of Sm to itself. Then the maps fi ◦I have k-dilations tending to zero and lie
in the homotopy class −a. Therefore −a lies in Vkπm(X).
Next, suppose that a and b lie in Vkπm(X). Again, let fi be a sequence of (pointed) maps in the
class a with k-dilation tending to zero, and let gi be a sequence of (pointed) maps in the homotopy
class b with k-dilation tending to zero. Let I be a map from Sm to Sm ∨Sm with degree (1,1). Let
hi be the map from Sm ∨Sm to X whose restriction to the ﬁrst copy of Sm is equal to fi and whose
restriction to the second copy of Sm is equal to gi. Then the sequence hi ◦I has k-dilation tending
to zero. Each map in the sequence lies in the homotopy class a + b. So a + b lies in Vkπm(X).
□
Lemma 13.2. For any ﬁnite simplicial complex X, the subgroups Vkπm(X) are nested, with
Vkπm(X) ⊂Vk+1πm(X).
Proof. For any map F, Dilk+1 F
1
k+1 ≤Dilk F 1/k by Proposition 2.4. In particular, if fi is a sequence
of maps with k-dilation tending to zero, then the (k+1)-dilation of fi also tends to zero. Therefore,
Vkπm(X) ⊂Vk+1πm(X).
□
These two lemmas show that Vkπm(X) form a ﬁltration of πm(X). The ﬁltration Vk also behaves
naturally under mappings.
Lemma 13.3. If Ψ : X →Y is a continuous pointed mapping between ﬁnite simplicial complexes,
then Ψ∗: πm(X) →πm(Y ) takes Vkπm(X) into Vkπm(Y ).
Proof. First homotope Ψ to a PL map with some ﬁnite Lipshitz constant L. Let a be a class in
Vkπm(X), realized by mappings fi : Sm →X with k-dilation tending to zero. The map Ψ ◦fi
from Sm to Y has k-dilation less than Lk Dilk(fi) →0. Each map Ψ ◦fi lies in the homotopy class
Ψ∗(a). Therefore, Ψ∗(a) lies in Vkπm(Y ).
□
In particular, if Ψ is a homotopy equivalence, then Ψ∗maps Vkπm(X) bijectively to Vkπm(Y ).
In other words, the ﬁltration we have deﬁned is homotopy invariant. Very little is known about
Vkπm(X) for spaces X besides Sn.
In the rest of this section, we mention a few other open problems.
13.1. Are there minimizers in the k-dilation problem? One might try to study the k-dilation
of mappings using the calculus of variations. I’m not sure how much can be achieved in this direction.
Let’s start by framing some questions. Suppose that we pick a homotopy class a ∈πm(Sn), and we
try to minimize the k-dilation of maps F : Sm →Sn in the homotopy class a. Will the inﬁmum
be achieved by a C1 map? If not, will the inﬁmum be achieved in some weaker space of maps?
The results in this paper give a little bit of information about these questions, which we summarize
here.
Our information about these questions comes from the following estimate.
Proposition 13.4. If F : S4 →S3 has non-trivial Steenrod-Hopf invariant, then Dil2(F) Dil3(F) >
c > 0.
Proof. This argument is based on the construction of the cycle Z(F) in Section 5.1. Our cycle
Z(F) is a 6-cycle in Γ1S3. By Proposition 6.4, the directed volume Vol(a,b,c)(Z(F)) is bounded by
C Dilb(F) Dilc(F). Now a + b + c ≤6, and we know a ≤1, and b, c ≤3. Hence the vector (b, c) is


70
LARRY GUTH
(2, 3), (3, 2), or (3, 3). So the total volume of Z(F) is bounded by C Dil2(F) Dil3(F) + C Dil3(F)2.
If F has non-trivial Steenrod-Hopf invariant, then Proposition 5.4 implies Z(F) is homologically
non-trivial. In this case, the total volume of Z(F) cannot be too small. Therefore Dil2(F) Dil3(F)
is bounded below.
□
If F : S4 →S3 has non-trivial Steenrod-Hopf invariant and yet Dil3(F) < ǫ, then we see
Dil2(F) ≳ǫ−1 and so Dil1(F) ≳ǫ−1/2. (It’s unclear how sharp these estimates are. The mappings
constructed in Proposition 3.2 have 3-dilation ǫ, 2-dilation ∼ǫ−2, and 1-dilation ∼ǫ−1.)
As a corollary, we see that there is no homotopically non-trivial C1 map F from S4 →S3 with
Λ3dF = 0.
So let’s consider the problem of minimizing Dil3(F) among all homotopically non-trivial maps
S4 →S3. It follows from the h-principle or from Proposition 3.2 that the inﬁmum is equal to zero.
Since there is no homotopically non-trivial C1 map from S4 to S3 with 3-dilation zero, we see that
the inﬁmum is not achieved by a C1 map.
Now we could try to consider less regular maps. It’s easy to deﬁne the k-dilation of a piecewise
C1-map. With a little extra work, we could probably deﬁne the k-dilation for Lipschitz maps, for
example by using Rademacher’s theorem. However, I believe that the last proposition could be
extended to Lipschitz maps. It would imply that Lip(F)2 Dil3(F) > c > 0 for any homotopically
non-trivial map F : S4 →S3. This would imply that the inﬁmum of Dil3(F) is not achieved by
any Lipschitz map.
For maps which are not even Lipschitz, I am not sure how to deﬁne the k-dilation.
Can we extend the 3-dilation to some appropriate “weak space of maps” where the inﬁmum is
achieved?
13.2. The rank of the derivative and the topology of the mapping. When I ﬁrst began to
work on this subject, I expected that every homotopically non-trivial map from Sm to Sn must
have n-dilation at least c(m, n) > 0. My incorrect intuition about the problem came partly from
Sard’s theorem. According to Sard’s theorem, every C∞map F from Sm to Sn has a full measure
set of regular values. If the n-dilation of F is zero, then every point in the domain is a critical point.
Hence every point in the image of F is a critical value. According to Sard’s theorem, if F is C∞
with zero n-dilation, then the image of F has measure zero. So we see that every C∞map from
Sm to Sn with n-dilation zero is contractible. At ﬁrst, I expected that this result should extend to
maps with suﬃciently tiny n-dilation - but it does not.
In [W], Whitney discovered that Sard’s theorem is false for C1 maps. In the mid 1970’s, Hirsch
raised the question if there could be a surjective C1 map from B3 to B2 with 2-dilation zero. In [K],
Kaufman produced such a map. Kaufman’s technique can easily be generalized to construct surjec-
tive C1 maps from S3 to S2 with zero 2-dilation. The maps constructed this way are contractible.
In fact, we have seen that every map from S3 to S2 with zero two-dilation is contractible.
We say that a C1 map F from one manifold to another has rank < k if the rank of dFx is less
than k for each x in the domain. A map has rank less than k if and only if it has k-dilation equal
to zero. The rank of a map is a diﬀerential topological invariant. We have very little knowledge
about how the rank of a map is related to its homotopy type.
Rank of the derivative and topology of mappings. Let F : Sm →Sn be a C1 map with rank
< k. What can we conclude about the homotopy type of F?
We don’t know any homotopically non-trivial C1 map from Sm to Sn with rank < n. Does one
exist?


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
71
A related question is whether there are homotopically non-trivial C1 maps Fi : Sm →Sn with
Diln(Fi) →0 and uniformly bounded 1-dilation.
Added in proof. Recently, Wenger and Young addressed this question in [WY]. They proved the
following result (page 2 of [WY]).
Theorem 13.5. (Wenger, Young) If n+1 ≤m < 2n−1, then any Lipschitz map f : Sm →Sn can
be extended to a Lipschitz map Bm+1 →Bn+1 whose derivative has rank ≤n almost everywhere.
Corollary 13.6. If n + 1 ≤m < 2n −1, and a ∈πm(Sn), then the suspension of a can be realized
by a Lipschitz map Sm+1 →Sn+1 whose derivative has rank ≤n almost everywhere.
13.3. On thick tubes. In Section 9, we constructed k-expanding embeddings I : S1(δ)×Bm−1(1) →
Bm(ǫ) for every ǫ > 0 and for all k > m/2. In other words, we constructed tubes with k-thickness
1 in arbitrarily small balls Bm(ǫ) for all k > m/2.
We don’t know whether this is sharp. It’s straightforward to check that a tube with 1-thickness
1 does not embed in a small ball. We don’t know if there are tubes with 2-thickness 1 in arbitrarily
small balls Bm(ǫ) for every dimension m.
We can generalize the question to embeddings from Sp × Bm−p into Bm. The generalization of
the thick tube construction in Section 9 gives the following lemma.
Lemma 13.7. If k >
m
p+1, then for any ǫ > 0, we can choose δ > 0, and construct a k-expanding
embedding from Sp(δ) × Bm−p(1) into Bm(ǫ).
We proved the lemma for the case p = 1 in Section 9. Now we give a straightforward generaliza-
tion to other values of p.
Proof. The domain Sp(δ)×Bm−p(1) is contained in Sp(δ)×[−1, 1]m−p. Now we apply a k-expanding
diﬀeomorphism that shrinks one direction of the cube by a factor λ > 1, and grows all the other
directions by a factor λ
1
k−1 . This map is a k-expanding diﬀeomorphism to Sp(δλ
1
k−1 )×[−λ−1, λ−1]×
[−λ
1
k−1 , λ
1
k−1 ]m−p−1. Now we choose δ so that δλ
1
k−1 = λ−1. In other words, δ = λ−
k
k−1 . So
Sp(δλ
1
k−1 ) × [−λ−1, λ−1] = Sp(λ−1) × [−λ−1, λ−1], which admits a 1-expanding embedding into a
ball Bp+1(Cλ−1). In summary, we have constructed a k-expanding embedding from our domain
into Bp+1(Cλ−1)×Bm−p−1(Cλ
1
k−1 ). The volume of this product of balls is ∼λ−(p+1)+ m−p−1
k−1 . The
condition k >
m
p+1 makes the exponent negative. By taking λ large, we can make the volume as
small as we want. This product of balls then admits a 1-expanding embedding into an arbitrarily
small ball (see Section 14.2 for details).
□
Is it possible to ﬁnd a k-expanding embedding Sp(δ)×Bm−p(1) into a small ball for any k ≤
m
p+1?
13.4. On k-dilation and Uryson width. Let F be a map from Sm to Sn with k-dilation W.
Let g0 denote the unit sphere metric on Sm, and let h0 denote the unit sphere metric on Sn. Let
g denote the “pullback metric” F ∗(h0). We use quotes because the symmetric tensor g may not
be positive deﬁnite. In fact it won’t be positive deﬁnite in the interesting case that m > n, but
g is always a positive semi-deﬁnite symmetric 2-tensor. We can let ˜g = g + ǫg0 for some tiny
ǫ > 0, so that ˜g is an honest metric on Sm. The k-dilation of F is closely related to Λkg - the
kth exterior power of the metric g. In particular, Λkg ≤Dilk(F)2Λkg0. If ǫ is small enough, then
Λk˜g ≤(1.01) Dilk(F)2Λkg0. This setup motivates the following question.
What can we say about metrics g on Sm obeying Λkg ≤Λkg0?
The Uryson widths are fundamental metric invariants of Riemannian manifolds. Recall that
the Ursyon q-width of a metric space X, denoted UWq(X), is deﬁned as follows. We say that


72
LARRY GUTH
UWq(X) ≤W if there is a continuous map from X to a q-dimensional polyhedron P q whose ﬁbers
each have diameter less than W. In other words, if x1, x2 ∈X are any two points of X mapped
to the same point of P, then the distance distX(x1, x2) should be ≤W. Intuitively, the Uryson
q-width of X measures “how far X is from looking like a q-dimensional polyhedron”.
The main facts about Uryson width are contained in the paper [GWR]. One fundamental fact is
that the Uryson (n −1)-width of the unit n-cube [0, 1]n is positive. In fact, the Lebesgue covering
lemma implies that UWn−1([0, 1]n) = 1. More generally, the Uryson q-width of a Riemannian
manifold of dimension > q is always positive.
For this section, we recall one other fact about
Uryson width.
Proposition 13.8. ([GWR]) For each dimension n, there is a constant β(n) > 0 so that the
following holds. If X is a metric space and UWn−1(X) < β(n), and F : X →Sn has Lipschitz
constant 1, then F is contractible.
Ursyon width question. If g is a metric on Sm obeying Λkg ≤Λkg0, then what can we say about
the Uryson widths of (Sm, g)?
In a recent preprint [GUUW], I proved that the codimension 1 Uryson width is controlled by the
volume:
Uryson width inequality. If (M m, g) is a closed m-dimensional Riemannian manifold, then
UWm−1(M, g) is at most C(m) Vol(M, g)1/m.
(This inequality is a technical improvement on the ﬁlling radius inequality from [GFRM].)
If Λmg ≤Λmg0, then one knows that the total volume of g is at most Vol(Sm, g0). By the Uryson
width inequality, we see that UWm−1(Sm, g) is bounded by a dimensional constant C(m).
As k decreases, the condition Λkg ≤Λkg0 becomes stronger, and for suﬃciently small k, it may
control Uryson q-widths for some q < m −1.
There are some examples built using the construction of “thick tubes” discussed in Lemma 13.7.
Thick tube metrics. Let c be an integer 2 ≤c ≤m −1. If k > m/c, then there are metrics g on
Sm with Λkg ≤Λkg0 and UWm−c(Sm, g) arbitrarily large.
Proof. Let p = c −1. According to Lemma 13.7, we can construct a k-expanding embedding I1
from Sp(δ) × Bm−p(R) into the upper hemisphere of (Sm, g0), with R arbitrarily large. (As R
increases, δ decreases.) Let U ⊂Sm be the image of the embedding. Let g be the pushforward of
the metric from Sp(δ) × Bm−p(R) onto U. So (U, g) is isometric to Sp(δ) × Bm−p(R). Since we
used a k-expanding embedding, Λkg ≤Λkg0 on U. Now we extend g to a metric on all of Sm with
Λkg ≤Λkg0 by making g very small outside of U.
We claim that the Uryson width UWm−p−1(Sm, g) is ≳R.
To see this we will prove that
(Sm, g0) contains an undistorted copy of Bm−p(R/2). In other words, we will ﬁnd an embedding
I : Bm−p(R/2) →(Sm, g) so that for any two points x, y ∈Bm−p(R/2), |x −y| = distg(I(x), I(y)).
Then it follows that UWm−p−1(Sm, g) ≥UWm−p−1(Bm−p(R/2)) ≳R.
The embedding I is very simple. We just pick a point θ ∈Sp(δ), and we deﬁne I(x) = I1(θ, x).
It only remains to check that this embedding is undistorted. Let x, y ∈Bm−p(R/2). First we note
that the distance in Sp(δ) × Bm−p(R) from (θ, x) to (θ, y) is just |x −y|. Now, let γ be a path from
I(x) to I(y) in (Sm, g). If the path γ stays in U, then the length of γ is at least |x −y|, because
(U, g) is isometric to Sp(δ) × Bm−p(R). But if the path γ leaves U, it must contain an arc from
I(x) to ∂U and another arc from I(y) to ∂U. Each of these arcs has length at least R/2. So the
total length of γ is at least R ≥|x −y|.
So we see that UWm−p−1(Sm, g) = UWm−c(Sm, g) can be arbitrarily large.
□


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
73
Based on these examples, the following conjecture looks plausible.
Uryson width conjecture. Let 1 ≤c ≤m. Let g be a metric on Sm with Λkg ≤Λkg0, where g0
is the unit sphere metric on Sm. If k ≤m/c, then UWm−c(Sm, g) ≤C(m).
The conjecture is true when c = 1 by the Uryson width inequality above. It is trivially true
when c = m, since Λ1g ≤Λ1g0 implies Diam(g) ≤Diam(g0), and UW0(Sm, g) is just the diameter
of (Sm, g). In the range 2 ≤c ≤m −1, the conjecture is open.
The Uryson width conjecture has implications for the questions we considered above, including
our main question. The ﬁrst implication is that our construction of thick tubes is optimal.
Thick tube conjecture. If I is a k-expanding embedding from Sp(δ) × Bm−p(R) into the unit
m-ball, and if k ≤
m
p+1, then R ≲1.
The second implication of the Uryson width conjecture is a general conjecture about k-dilation
and contractibility of mappings.
Null-homotopy conjecture. If k ≤m/c and n > m−c, then every non-contractible map F from
the unit m-sphere to the unit n-sphere has Dilk(F) ≥c(m, n) > 0.
The Uryson width conjecture implies the null-homotopy conjecture by the following argument.
Let h0 be the metric on the unit n-sphere.
Let g be the pullback metric F ∗(h0) and let ˜g =
g + ǫg0. We know that Λkg ≤Dilk(F)2Λk(g0), and if ǫ is small enough, we can assume that Λk˜g ≤
2 Dilk(F)2Λkg0. Since k ≤(m/c), the Uryson width conjecture implies that UWm−c(Sm, ˜g) ≲
Dilk(F)1/k. Now the map F : (Sm, ˜g) →(Sn, h0) has Lipschitz constant 1. If UWm−c(Sm, ˜g) is
small enough, then Proposition 13.8 implies that F is contractible.
For example, the null-homotopy conjecture says that if F : Sm →Sm−1 has tiny m/2-dilation,
then F is contractible. This statement is actually true by our Steenrod square inequality. (The
Steenrod square inequality is a little stronger than this statement, because it also applies to (m +
1)/2-dilation.)
The null-homotopy conjecture also says that if F : Sm →Sm−2 has tiny m/3 dilation, then F
should be contractible. This is an open problem.
14. Appendices
14.1. A probability lemma. In this section, we recall and prove a simple probability lemma that
we used a couple times in the paper.
Suppose that X = Q
i∈I Xi is a (countable or ﬁnite) product of probability spaces. Suppose that
B ⊂X is a “bad” set, consisting of a union B = ∪Bα. We would like to ﬁnd a not-bad element
of X i.e. an element x ∈X which is not in B. We know that the measure (probability) of each
Bα is less than ǫ a small number. But, we have no control over the number of sets Bα. Therefore,
on average, an element of X may lie in over a thousand diﬀerent Bα. We can still ﬁnd an element
outside of B provided that the sets Bα are “localized” in the following sense.
Lemma 14.1. Suppose that B is the union of sets Bα each with probability less than ǫ. Suppose
that each set Bα depends on < C1 diﬀerent coordinates xi of the point x. Suppose that each variable
is relevant for < C2 diﬀerent bad sets Bα. If ǫ < (1/2)C−C1
2
, then B is not all of X.
This lemma is an easy corollary of the Lovasz local lemma. The hypotheses imply that each set
Bα0 is independent of the other sets except for C1C2 of them. Then the local lemma implies our
lemma with a better estimate for ǫ. The local lemma is proven in [EL] and [AS].
Our lemma is quite easy, and we give a short self-contained proof as well.


74
LARRY GUTH
Proof. The idea is that we just choose the coordinates x1, x2, ... one at a time in a reasonable way.
Let I(α) ⊂I be the set of coordinates that are relevant for the bad set B(α). We know that the
number of elements |I(α)| < C1. Similarly, we let A(i) be the set of bad events α which depend on
the coordinate xi. We know that the number of elements |A(i)| < C2. We let P(α) be the measure
of B(α). After choosing x1, x2, ..., xi, we let Pi(α) be the conditional probability of landing in B(α)
after randomly making all other choices. We let Ii(α) be the set of coordinates j ∈I(α) with
1 ≤j ≤i.
When we choose xi+1, we aﬀect some of the probabilities. If α is not in A(i+ 1), then Pi+1(α) =
Pi(α). But if α ∈A(i + 1), then Pi+1(α) may be diﬀerent from Pi(α). When we randomly pick
xi+1, the probability that Pi+1(α) > C2Pi(α) is ≤C−1
2 . Since A(i + 1) contains < C2 values of α,
we can choose xi+1 so that Pi+1(α) ≤C2Pi(α) for every α ∈A(i + 1).
Hence by induction, we have Pi(α) ≤C|Ii(α)|
2
ǫ for each α.
After we have chosen all the xi, the conditional probability P∞(α) is either 0 or 1. P∞(α) = 1
if the point x = (x1, x2, ...) lies in B(α), and P∞(α) = 0 if it doesn’t. Our inequality on Pi(α)
becomes in the limit P∞(α) ≤CC1
2 ǫ ≤1/2, and so the point x does not lie in any bad set B(α).
□
14.2. Bilipschitz embeddings of rectangles. At several points in the paper we use a bilipschitz
embedding from some rectangular solid into a unit ball.
These embeddings can all be derived
from the following basic lemma, which describes when there is a bilipschitz embedding from one
rectangular solid into another.
Lemma 14.2. Suppose that R and S are n-dimensional rectangles. Let R = Qn
j=1[0, Rj] with
R1 ≤... ≤Rn, and let S = Qn
j=1[0, Sj] with S1 ≤... ≤Sn. If Qp
j=1 Rj ≥Qp
j=1 Sj for all p in the
range 1 ≤p ≤n, then there is a locally C(n)-bilipschitz embedding from S into R.
Recall that an embedding I : S →R is called locally L-bilipschitz if it distorts the lengths of
tangent vectors by at most a factor of L. More precisely, if v is any tangent vector in S, then
|v|/L ≤|dI(v)| ≤L|v|.
The proof is by induction on the dimension. Unfortunately, the algebra is a bit tedious. It has
the following corollary.
Corollary. Suppose that A is an n-dimensional convex set in Rn with volume 1. Then there is
a locally C(n)-bilipschitz embedding into the unit n-ball or into the upper hemisphere of the unit
n-sphere.
Proof. After a rotation, the set A is a subset of a rectangle R with volume ≤C(n), for some
C(n) > 1. The rectangle has side lengths R1 ≤... ≤Rn and Qn
j=1 Rj ≤C(n). Since the Rj
are increasing, we have Qp
j=1 Rj ≤C(n) also. By Lemma 14.2, this rectangle admits a locally
C(n)-bilipschitz embedding into the unit cube. The unit cube has a C(n)-bilipschitz embedding
into the unit ball or the upper hemisphere.
□
Lemma 14.2 is sharp up to constant factors. If there is an L-bilipschitz embedding from S into
R, then R1...Rp ≥c(n)L−pS1...Sp for each p from 1 to n. A proof is given in [GUWV]. The known
proofs are surprisingly diﬃcult. All the proofs use homology theory. It would be interesting to ﬁnd
a really elementary proof. Now we give the proof of Lemma 14.2.
Proof. The proof is by induction on n. The base case is n = 2.
Suppose that R1 ≥S1 and R1R2 ≥S1S2. If R2 ≥S2, then the identity map is an embedding
from S into R, and there is nothing to prove. If R2 < S2, then S is longer and thinner than R,


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
75
and the area of S is smaller than the area of R. In this case, we can make a locally 10-bilipschitz
embedding by folding S back and forth inside of R.
For general n, we construct the bilipschitz embedding by using this construction repeatedly with
diﬀerent coordinates. We know that R1 ≥S1. If Rj ≥Sj for all j, then the identity map is an
embedding from S into R, and there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, let a be the smallest value so
that Ra < Sa. We know that a ≥2, and so Ra−1 ≥Sa−1.
We will deﬁne a rectangle S′ with S′
j = Sj except for j = a −1 and j = a, and we will use the
2-dimensional case to ﬁnd a 10-bilipschitz embedding from S into S′. Now S′ will have the property
that either S′
a = Ra or else S′
a−1 = R′
a−1. Then by induction, we will construct a C(n−1)-bilipschitz
embedding from S′ into R. Now we turn to the details.
We consider the ratios Ra−1/Sa−1 ≥1 and Sa/Ra ≥1. We proceed in two cases, depending on
which ratio is larger.
Suppose ﬁrst that Ra−1/Sa−1 ≥Sa/Ra. Deﬁne S′
a = Ra and S′
a−1 = (Sa/Ra)Sa−1 ≤Ra−1 ≤
Ra = S′
a. We note that S′
a−1 ≥Sa−1 ≥Sa−2 and S′
a ≤Sa ≤Sa+1. Now we deﬁne S′
j = Sj for all j
except a −1 and a. The inequalities we have proven show that S′
j are in order: S′
1 ≤S′
2 ≤... ≤S′
n.
We let S′ be the corresponding rectangle Qn
j=1[0, S′
j]. By the 2-dimensional case, there is a 10-
bilipschitz embedding from [0, Sa−1] × [0, Sa] into [0, S′
a−1] × [0, S′
a]. Using the identity in the other
coordinates, we get a 10-bilipschitz embedding from S into S′.
We claim that Qp
j=1 S′
j ≤Qp
j=1 Rj for all p. For p ≤a −2, this follows because Qp
j=1 S′
j =
Qp
j=1 Sj. We also note that S′
a−1S′
a = Sa−1Sa, and so for p ≥a, Qp
j=1 S′
j = Qp
j=1 Sj ≤Qp
j=1 Rj.
Finally, we have to consider p = a −1.
Since S′
a−1 ≤Ra−1, Qa−1
j=1 S′
j ≤(Qa−2
j=1 S′
j)Ra−1 ≤
(Qa−2
j=1 Rj)Ra−1 = Qa−1
j=1 Rj. This proves the claim. Now we let R = ¯R×[0, Ra] and S′ = ¯S′×[0, Ra],
where ¯R is the product of [0, Rj] for j ̸= a, and ¯S′ is the product of [0, S′
j] for j ̸= a. By induc-
tion, we see that there is a C(n −1)-bilipschitz embedding from ¯S′ into ¯R. Using the identity in
the a-coordinate, we get a C(n −1)-bilipschitz embedding from S′ into R. Composing our two
embeddings, we get a 10C(n −1)-bilipschitz embedding from S into R.
The other case is similar. Suppose that Ra−1/Sa−1 ≤Sa/Ra. Deﬁne S′
a−1 = Ra−1 and S′
a =
(Sa−1/Ra−1)Sa. We note that Ra ≤S′
a ≤Sa. Therefore Sa−2 ≤Sa−1 ≤S′
a−1 = Ra−1 ≤Ra ≤
S′
a ≤Sa ≤Sa+1.
We deﬁne S′
j = Sj for all j except a −1 and a.
The inequalities we have
proven show that the S′
j are in order, and we deﬁne S′ = Qn
j=1[0, S′
j] By the 2-dimensional case
there is a 10-bilipschitz embedding from S into S′. By the same arguments as above, we can check
that Qp
j=1 S′
j ≤Qp
j=1 Rj for all p.
This time, S′
a−1 = Ra−1.
We let R = ¯R × [0, Ra−1] and
S′ = ¯S′ × [0, S′
a−1]. By induction, we see that there is a C(n −1)-bilipschitz embedding from ¯S′
into ¯R. Using the identity in the a-coordinate, we get a C(n −1)-bilipschitz embedding from S′
into R. Composing our two embeddings, we get a 10C(n −1)-bilipschitz embedding from S into
R.
□
14.3. Basic facts about ﬂat chains and ﬂat equivalence. We use some basic facts about ﬂat
chains and ﬂat equivalence in Section 4.2 and Section 5.1. In this appendix, we review the basic
facts.
The ﬂat norm is usually deﬁned for chains in a Riemannian manifold. Here we have to work with
chains in a ﬁnite CW complex with Lipschitz attaching maps. This is only slightly harder. If X is a
ﬁnite CW complex with Lipschitz attaching maps, then X is a metric space in a natural way. The
complex X is given by ﬁnitely many closed balls with some identiﬁcations. We put the standard
unit ball metric on each closed ball, and we deﬁne the metric on X to be the quotient metric coming


76
LARRY GUTH
from the identiﬁcations. So we can deﬁne Lipschitz maps into X and Lipschitz chains. The volume
of a Lipschitz chain is deﬁned by breaking the chain into pieces in each open cell, and the volume
of each piece is deﬁned in the usual way.
One fundamental result about the volumes of chains is that a cycle of small volume must be
null-homologous. We formulate this as a lemma and prove it by the standard Federer-Fleming
deformation argument.
Lemma 14.3. If X is a ﬁnite CW complex with Lipschitz attaching maps, then there is a constant
ǫ > 0 so that the following holds. If z is a mod 2 Lipschitz cycle in X with volume < ǫ, then z is
homologically trivial.
Proof. Suppose that z is a d-cycle. We homotope z into the d-skeleton of X while keeping control
of the volume. We may assume that all the attaching maps have Lipschitz constant < L. If z
initially lies in the N-skeleton of X for some N > d, then we homotope it to the (N-1)-skeleton by
picking a random point near the middle of each N-cell, and pushing out radially into the boundary
of the cell. By the Federer-Fleming averaging trick, we can choose a point so that this push out
map increases volumes by at most a factor C(N). From the boundary of the cell, we map into
the (N-1)-skeleton of X using the attaching maps, which stretch volumes by at most a factor Ld.
Repeating this for each dimension, we homotope z to a cycle z′ in the d-skeleton of X with volume
at most C(X)ǫ. If ǫ is small enough, then z′ doesn’t cover any d-cell of the d-skeleton, and so z′ is
null-homologous.
□
If T is a mod 2 Lipschitz d-chain in a CW complex, then the ﬂat norm of T is deﬁned to be the
inﬁmum over all (d+1)-chains U of Vold+1(U)+ Vold(T −∂U). In other words, a chain T may have
a small norm if it has small volume, or if it is the boundary of a (d+1)-chain with small volume, or
if it is the sum of pieces of these two types. It’s staightforward to check that the ﬂat norm obeys
the triangle inequality: FlatNorm(T1 + T2) ≤FlatNorm(T1) + FlatNorm(T2).
The ﬂat distance between T1 and T2 is deﬁned to be the ﬂat norm of T1 −T2. If the ﬂat distance
between two Lipschitz chains is zero, we say they are ﬂat equivalent. Because the ﬂat norm obeys
the triangle inequality, it follows that ﬂat equivalence is an equivalence relation. The ﬂat norm
deﬁnes a metric on the set of equivalence classes of Lipschitz chains.
The resulting metric space is not complete, and the space of ﬂat chains is the completion of this
metric space. However, in this paper, we only need the notion of ﬂat equivalence.
Here are some examples of ﬂat equivalence. If T1 and T2 diﬀer by a chain with volume zero,
then they are ﬂat equivalent. Also, if T1 and T2 are two homologous d-dimensional cycles in a
d-dimensional complex, then they are ﬂat equivalent, because T1 −T2 is the boundary of a (d+1)-
chain which must have zero (d+1)-volume. The diﬀerent ﬂat equivalences that appear in Sections
4.2 and 5.1 just come from these two observations.
The last small result that we need is that two ﬂat equivalent Lipschitz cycles are homologous.
Lemma 14.4. Suppose that z1 and z2 are ﬂat equivalent Lipschitz cycles in a ﬁnite CW complex
X with Lipschitz attaching maps. Then z1 and z2 are homologous.
Proof. We know that the ﬂat norm of z1 −z2 is zero. So for any ǫ > 0, we can ﬁnd a Lipschitz chain
U so that U has volume < ǫ and ∂U −z1 + z2 has volume < ǫ. Obviously, ∂U is homologically
trivial. If ǫ is small enough, then ∂U −z1 + z2 is homologically trivial by Lemma 14.3. Therefore,
z1 −z2 is homologically trivial.
□


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
77
14.4. Standard facts about the deformation operator. In this section, we review some stan-
dard facts about the deformation operator, which we stated in Section 8.4. We work with mod 2
chains and cycles. (The statements here can be extended to other coeﬃcients, but we don’t need
them and it takes extra work to keep track of the orientations.)
If T is a d-chain, s > 0 is a scale, and v ∈RN is a vector, then we deﬁne the deformation
operator Dv(T ) by the following formula,
DvT :=
X
F ⊂Σd(s)
[ ¯Fv ∩T ]F.
In this formula, [ ¯Fv ∩T ] ∈Z2 is the number of points in ¯Fv ∩T taken mod 2. If ¯Σ(s) is transverse
to T , then DvT is well-deﬁned. The deformation DvT is a cubical d-chain in Σd(s).
The deformation operator has the following properties.
1. If |v| < s/2, and if T is a cubical d-chain in Σ(s), then Dv(T ) = T .
Proof. We just have to check that if F, G are d-faces of Σ(s), then [ ¯Fv ∩G] is equal to 1 if F = G
and 0 if F ̸= G. This holds for v = 0. The boundary of ¯F lies at a distance ≥s/2 from the face G.
So as we continuously translate ¯F to ¯Fv, the intersection number doesn’t change.
□
2. The deformation operator commutes with taking boundaries. In other words, as long as ¯Σv
is transverse to both ∂T and T , ∂Dv(T ) = Dv(∂T ).
Proof. From the formula for Dv(T ), we see that
∂Dv(T ) =
X
F d⊂Σd(s)
[ ¯Fv ∩T ]∂F.
Consider a (d-1)-face G in Σd−1. Let F1(G), ..., F2(N−d+1)(G) be the set of all the d-faces of
Σd(s) that contain G in their boundary. We can rewrite the formula for ∂Dv(T ) as follows:
∂Dv(T ) =
X
Gd−1⊂Σd−1(s)


2(N−d+1)
X
j=1
[Fj(G)v ∩T ]

G.
Now the ﬁrst key point is that P2(N−d+1)
j=1
Fj(G) = ∂¯G. Plugging in, we get
∂Dv(T ) =
X
Gd−1⊂Σd−1(s)
[∂¯Gv ∩T ]G.
Since ¯Σv is transverse to T , ¯Gv ∩T is a 1-chain, and the boundary of ¯Gv ∩T consists of an even
number of points. Since ¯Σv is transverse to T and ∂T , the boundary of ¯Gv ∩T is the union of
∂¯Gv ∩T and ¯Gv ∩∂T . Therefore, [∂¯Gv ∩T ] = [ ¯Gv ∩∂T ]. Substituting this identity into the last
equation, we get
∂Dv(T ) =
X
Gd−1⊂Σd−1(s)
[ ¯Gv ∩∂T ]G = D(∂T ).
□
3. If we average over all |v| < s/2, then
Averagev∈B(s/2) Vold[Dv(T )] ≤C(N) Vold(T ).


78
LARRY GUTH
Proof. This follows by integral geometry. If F is a face of Σd(s), let B[F] denote the ball around
the center of F with radius Ns. If we take a random vector v ∈B(s/2), the probability that
[ ¯Fv ∩T ] = 1 is at most C(N)s−N Vold(T ∩B[F]). Therefore the average volume on the left-hand
side is
≤C(N)
X
F
Vold(T ∩B[F]) ≤C(N) Vold(T ).
□
4. If z is a d-cycle, then we can build a (d+1)-chain Av(z) in the C(N)s neighborhood of z with
∂Av(z) = z −Dv(z). Moreover, if we average over all |v| < s/2, then
Averagev Vold+1[Av(z)] ≤C(N)s Vold(z).
This estimate takes a little more work. There are several variations of the deformation operator.
We begin by recalling a diﬀerent point of view about the deformation operator, where the chain A
appears more naturally. Then we see how the diﬀerent points of view are connected.
Suppose that z is a d-cycle in RN. Federer and Fleming gave a procedure to homotope z into
Σd
v(s) (which is well-deﬁned for almost every v).
For each N-cube QN of Σv(s), we project z
outward from the center to the boundary of Q. As long as z doesn’t intersect the center point, we
get a homotopy into the (N-1)-skeleton of Σv(s). If d < N −1, we repeat this operation with each
(N-1)-cube QN−1 of Σv(s). We continue in this way until we have homotoped z into the d-skeleton
of Σv(s). We can do this as long as, at each step of the homotopy, the image of z does not include
any of the center points of the cubes.
This procedure deﬁnes a homotopy Hv : z × [0, 1] →RN, for t ∈[0, 1], where Hv at time 0 is
the identity and Hv at time 1 maps z into the d-skeleton of Σv(s). (We will see below that the
homotopy Hv is deﬁned for almost every v.)
We notice that Hv(z, 1) is a d-cycle in Σd
v(s). Since Σd
v(s) is a d-dimensional polyhedron, Hv(z, 1)
is homologous to a sum of faces. In other words, we have
Hv(z, 1) =
X
F ∈Σd(s)
c(F)Fv + ∂ν,
where c(F) are coeﬃcients and ν is a (d+1)-chain in Σd
v(s). Note that ν is a (d+1)-chain with
Vold+1(ν) = 0, so Hv(z, 1) is essentially equal to P
F ∈Σd(s) c(F)Fv. We now deﬁne the Federer-
Fleming deformation of z by
˜Dv(z) :=
X
F ∈Σd(s)
c(F)Fv.
(The chain ˜Dv(z) is closely related to Dv(z), as we explain below, but they are not identical.)
We now compute the constant c(F). The constant c(F) measures the number of times that
Hv(z, 1) covers the face Fv, taken mod 2.
If Q is an e-face of Σv(s) with center xQ, let πQ : Q\{xQ} →∂Q be the radial projection. Notice
that the center xQ is Q ∩¯ΣN−e
v
(s). By applying the radial projection πQ in each e-face Q, we get
a map πd : Σe
v(s) \ ¯ΣN−e
v
(s) →Σe−1
v
(s). To get a map from RN to Σd
v(s), we use the composition
π := πd+1 ◦... ◦πN.
The map π is not deﬁned on all of RN, but it is a well-deﬁned map from RN \ ¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s) to
Σd
v(s). (To see this, we just have to check that for each e ≥d + 1, πe maps Σe
v(s) \ ¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s)


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
79
into Σe−1
v
(s) \ ¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s).) Therefore, the homotopy H is well-deﬁned as long as z is disjoint from
¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s), which happens for almost every v.
If Fv is a d-face of Σv(s) with center x(Fv), then π−1(x(Fv)) is just ¯Fv - the perpendicular
(N-d)-face of ¯Σv(s). If z is transverse to ¯Σv(s), then we see that the coeﬃcient c(F) is just the
intersection number c(F) = [z ∩¯Fv]. Therefore, we get the following formula for ˜Dv(z):
˜Dv(z) =
X
F ∈Σn(s)
[z ∩¯Fv]Fv.
So we see that ˜Dv(z) is just the translation of Dv(z) by the vector v.
Now we can deﬁne the homology Av(z). Since ˜Dv(z) is just a translation of Dv(z) by a vector v,
there is an obvious homotopy between them, given by translations. This homotopy deﬁnes a chain
H′ with ∂H′ = Dv(z) −˜Dv(z). The chain Av(z) is the sum of Hv(z × [0, 1]) and the chain ν and
the chain H′.
Lemma 14.5. If |v| ≤s and if we choose the zero-volume chain ν correctly, then Av(z) is contained
in the C(N)s neighborhood of z.
Proof. By construction, the homotopy Hv displaces points by ≤C(N)s: in other words, |Hv(x, t)−
x| ≤C(N)s. Therefore, Hv(z × [0, 1]) lies in the C(N)s neighborhood of z. Therefore, ˜Dv(z) lies
in the C(N)s neighborhood of z. Now Hv(z, 1) −˜Dv(z) is a null-homologous cycle in Σd
v(s) lying
in the C(N)s neighborhood of z. Therefore, we can ﬁll it by a chain ν in Σd
v(s) lying in the same
neighborhood. Finally, since |v| ≤s, the homotopy H′ lies in the s-neighborhood of ˜Dv(z) and in
the C(N)s-neighborhood of z.
□
Next we turn to bounding the volume of Av(z). Federer and Fleming observed that if we take a
random vector v in B(s/2), then there are several useful volume estimates that hold on average.
Proposition 14.6. The following estimates hold for the average behavior of Hv and ˜Dv(z):
Averagev∈B(s/2) Vold ˜Dv(z) ≤C(N) Vold z.
Averagev∈B(s/2) Vold+1 H(z × [0, 1]) ≤C(N)s Vold z.
We sketch the proof of the proposition. For more details, see [GFRM] pages 16-20. By a direct
computation, one shows that for any d-cycle z,
Vold π(z) ≤C(N)
Z
z
Dist(x, ¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s))−ddvolz(x).
If we use a random translation v ∈B(s/2), then the average value of the last line is
C(N)s−N
Z
B(s/2)
Z
z
Dist(x, ¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s))−ddvolz(x)

dv.
The key insight of Federer-Fleming is to estimate this double integral using Fubini. It is equal
to
C(N)
Z
z
 
s−N
Z
B(s/2)
Dist(x, ¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s))−ddv
!
dvolz(x).


80
LARRY GUTH
Now the expression in the large parentheses does not depend on z, and it is bounded ≤C(N)
uniformly in x. Therefore, the whole last line is ≤C(N) Vold z.
By another direct computation, the (d+1)-volume of the homotopy H from z to π(z) is bounded
by
Vold+1 Hv(z × [0, 1]) ≤sC(N)
Z
z
Dist(x, ¯ΣN−d−1
v
(s))−ddvolz(x).
And the same argument shows that s−N R
B(s/2) Vold+1 Hv(z × [0, 1]) ≤C(N)s Vold z.
The last estimate is the main term in bounding the volume of Av(z) = Hv(z × [0, 1]) + ν + H′.
The chain ν has zero volume. The chain H′ is given by translating ˜Dv(z) to Dv(z), and so it has
volume at most |v| Vold ˜Dv(z) ≤C(N)s Vold z. Therefore, for an average v ∈BN(s/2), the chain
Av(z) has (d+1)-volume at most C(N)s Vold z.
References
[AS] Alon, Noga, Spencer, Joel, The Probabilistic Method Third edition. With an appendix on the life and work
of Paul Erd˝os. Wiley-Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics and Optimization. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, NJ, 2008.
[Ar] Arnold, V. I. The asymptotic Hopf invariant and its applications. Selected translations. Selecta Math. Soviet. 5
(1986), no. 4, 327-345.
[BS] Bechtluft-Sachs, Stefan, Inﬁma of universal energy functionals on homotopy classes. Math. Nachr. 279 (2006),
no. 15, 1634-1640.
[BT] Bott, Raoul, Tu, Loring, Diﬀerential Forms in Algebraic Topology Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 82.
Springer-Verlag, New York-Berlin, 1982.
[DGS] DeTurck, D., Gluck H., and Storm, P., Lipschitz minimality of Hopf ﬁbrations and Hopf vector ﬁelds,
arXiv:1009.5439.
[EL] Erd˝os, P.; Lov´asz, L. Problems and results on 3-chromatic hypergraphs and some related questions. Inﬁnite
and ﬁnite sets (Colloq., Keszthely, 1973; dedicated to P. Erd?s on his 60th birthday), Vol. II, pp. 609-627. Colloq.
Math. Soc. Janos Bolyai, Vol. 10, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1975.
[EM] Eliashberg, Y., and Mishachev, N. , Introduction to the h-principle Graduate Studies in Mathematics, 48.
American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2002.
[FH] Freedman, Michael H.; He, Zheng-Xu Divergence-free ﬁelds: energy and asymptotic crossing number. Ann. of
Math. (2) 134 (1991), no. 1, 189-229.
[Ge] Gehring, F. W. Inequalities for condensers, hyperbolic capacity, and extremal lengths. Michigan Math. J. 18
1971 1-20.
[GCC] Gromov, M., Carnot-Carathodory spaces seen from within. in Sub-Riemannian geometry, 79-323, Progr.
Math., 144, Birkhuser, Basel, 1996.
[GFRM] Gromov, M., Filling Riemannian manifolds. J. Diﬀerential Geom. 18 (1983), no. 1, 1-147.
[GHED] Gromov, M.; Homotopical eﬀects of dilatation, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 13 (1978), no. 3, 303-310.
[GMS] Gromov, Misha; Metric Structures on Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces, Modern Birkhuser Classics.
Birkhauser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 2007.
[GPDR] Gromov, M., Partial Diﬀerential Relations, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results
in Mathematics and Related Areas (3)], 9. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986.
[GWR] Gromov, M. Width and related invariants of Riemannian manifolds. On the geometry of diﬀerentiable man-
ifolds (Rome, 1986). Astrisque No. 163-164 (1988), 6, 93-109, 282 (1989).
[GUT] Guth, L., Area-contracting maps between rectangles, PhD thesis
[GURH] Guth, L., Isoperimetric inequalities and rational homotopy invariants, arXiv:0802.3550.
[GUUW] Guth, L., Uryson width and volumes of balls, preprint
[GUWV] Guth, L., The width-volume inequality, Geom. Funct. Anal. 17 (2007), no. 4, 1139-1179.
[H] Hatcher, A., Algebraic Topology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
[K] Kaufman, R., A singular map of a cube onto a square. J. Diﬀerential Geom. 14 (1979), no. 4, 593-594.


CONTRACTION OF AREAS VS. TOPOLOGY OF MAPPINGS
81
[M] Milnor, J., Topology from the Diﬀerentiable Viewpoint, Based on notes by David W. Weaver. Revised reprint of
the 1965 original. Princeton Landmarks in Mathematics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1997.
[R] Riviere, T. , Minimizing ﬁbrations and p-harmonic maps in homotopy classes from S3 into S2, Comm. Anal.
Geom. 6 (1998), no. 3, 427-483.
[T] Toda, H., Composition Methods in Homotopy Groups of Spheres, Annals of Mathematics Studies, No. 49 Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton, N.J. 1962.
[TW] Tsui, Mao-Pei; Wang, Mu-Tao, Mean curvature ﬂows and isotopy of maps between spheres. Comm. Pure Appl.
Math. 57 (2004), no. 8, 1110-1126.
[WY] Wenger, S. and Young, R., Lipschitz homotopy groups of the Heisenberg group, arXiv:1210.6943
[W] Whitney, H., A function not constant on a connected set of critical points. Duke Math. J. 1 (1935), no. 4,
514-517.
[YL] Young, L. C., Some extremal questions for simplicial complexes. V. The relative area of a Klein bottle. Rend.
Circ. Mat. Palermo (2) 12 1963 257-274.
[Y] Young, R., Filling inequalities for nilpotent groups, arXiv:math/0608174.
