arXiv:0709.1241v1  [math.DG]  9 Sep 2007
HOMOTOPICALLY NON-TRIVIAL MAPS WITH SMALL
K-DILATION
LARRY GUTH
Abstract. We construct homotopically non-trivial maps from Sm to Sn with
arbitrarily small 3-dilation for certain pairs (m, n). The simplest example is
the case m = 4, n = 3, and there are other pairs with arbitrarily large values of
both m and n. We show that a homotopy class in π7(S4) can be represented
by maps with arbitrarily small 4-dilation if and only if the class is torsion.
The k-dilation of a map measures how much the map stretches k-dimensional
volumes.
If f is a C1 map between Riemannian manifolds, we say that the k-
dilation of f is at most D if f maps each k-dimensional submanifold of the domain
with volume V to an image with volume at most DV . We get the same k-dilation
whether we consider all submanifolds or whether we consider only small disks, and
so the k-dilation can also be deﬁned in terms of the ﬁrst derivative df. Recall that
Λkdf, the k-fold exterior product of the derivative df, maps ΛkT M to ΛkT N. If f
is C1, the k-dilation of f is equal to the supremal value of the norm |Λkdf|.
In this paper, we examine to what extent a bound on the k-dilation of a map
controls the homotopy type of the map. A beautiful result of this kind was recently
obtained by Tsui and Wang in [7].
Theorem. (Tsui and Wang) Let f be a C1 map from Sm to Sn, where m ≥2. If
the 2-dilation of f is less than 1, then f is nullhomotopic.
The main result of this paper shows that the situation is very diﬀerent for 3-
dilation.
Theorem 1. For each n, there are inﬁnitely many m so that the following holds:
there are homotopically non-trivial maps from Sm to Sn with arbitrarily small 3-
dilation.
This result partly answers a question raised by Gromov in [5] (page 231). Gromov
asked for which values of k, q, m, and n is a map f : Sm →Sn with a suﬃciently
small norm |Λkdf|Lq necessarily null-homotopic.
We make the following deﬁnition. A homotopy class a in πm(Sn) lies in Vkπm(Sn)
if there are maps in the homotopy class a with arbitrarily small k-dilation. We will
prove that Vkπm(Sn) is a subgroup of πm(Sn) and that Vkπm(Sn) ⊂Vk+1πm(Sn).
Therefore, Vkπm(Sn) deﬁnes a ﬁltration of πm(Sn). More generally, we will deﬁne
a ﬁltration Vkπm(X) for any space X.
Our methods give some partial information about the ﬁltration Vkπm(Sn). The
information is most interesting for the ﬁltration Vkπ7(S4). Recall that π7(S4) is
isomorphic to Z ⊕Z12.
Theorem 2. The group V4π7(S4) is the torsion subgroup of π7(S4). It is a proper,
non-zero subgroup.
1


2
LARRY GUTH
The paper is organized as follows. In the ﬁrst section, we prove the ﬁrst theorem.
In the second section, we summarize some lower bounds for k-dilation that appear
in the literature.
In the third section, we deﬁne Vkπm(X), and prove its basic
algebraic properties. In the fourth section, we look at some examples, including
Vkπ7(S4).
This paper is based on a section of my thesis. I would like to thank my thesis
advisor, Tom Mrowka, for his help and support.
1. Homotopically non-trivial maps with small k-dilation
This section contains the main result of the paper. It gives a construction for
maps between spheres with very small k-dilation which are homotopic to high order
suspensions.
Proposition 1. Fix a homotopy class a in πm(Sn) and then consider its p-fold
suspension Σpa in πm+p(Sn+p), and let k be an integer greater than n + (n/m)p.
Then there are maps from Sm+p to Sn+p in the homotopy class Σpa with arbitrarily
small k-dilation.
Proof. Let f1 be a map in the homotopy class a from [0, 1]m to the unit n-sphere,
taking the boundary of the domain to the basepoint of Sn. Let f2 be a degree 1
map from [0, 1]p to the unit p-sphere, taking the boundary of the domain to the
basepoint of Sp. We can assume both maps are C1, and we pick a number L which
is bigger than the Lipshitz constant of either map.
Inside of the unit (m+p)-sphere, we can quasi-isometrically embed a rectangle
R with dimensions [0, ǫ]m × [0, ǫ−m/p]p. (The quasi-isometric constant does not
depend on ǫ.) Now we construct a map F from R to Sn ×Sp. The map F is a direct
product of a map F1 from [0, ǫ]m to Sn and a map F2 from [0, ǫ−m/p]p to Sp. The
map F1 is just a dilation from [0, ǫ]m to the unit cube, composed with the map f1.
The map F2 is just a dilation from [0, ǫ−m/p]p to [0, 1]p, composed with the map
f2.
When k is bigger than n, the k-dilation of F is less than (Lǫ−1)n(Lǫm/p)k−n.
Expanding this expression gives Lkǫ−n+(m/p)k−(m/p)n. The important part of the
expression is the power of ǫ, which is equal to (m/p)(k −n −(n/m)p). We have
assumed that k is greater than n + (n/m)p, and so the exponent of ǫ is positive.
For ǫ suﬃciently small, the k-dilation of F is arbitrarily small.
The map F takes the boundary of R to Sn ∨Sp. We compose F with a smash
map, which is a degree 1 map from Sn × Sp to Sn+p, taking Sn ∨Sp to the base
point. The result is a map from R to Sn+p which takes the boundary of R to
the basepoint.
We can easily extend this map to all of Sm+p by mapping the
complement of R to the basepoint of Sn+p. The resulting map is homotopic to
Σp(a), and it has arbitrarily small k-dilation.
□
We can apply our proposition to the non-trivial homotopy class in π4(S3), which
is represented by the suspension of the Hopf ﬁbration. In this case, we are consid-
ering a 1-fold suspension of a map from S3 to S2. Therefore p = 1, m = 3, and
n = 2. Since 3 > 2 + (2/3)1, this homotopy class can be realized by maps from S4
to S3 with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
We now turn to the proof of our main theorem, which gives inﬁnitely many
examples of non-trivial homotopy classes that can be realized with arbitrarily small
3-dilation. The proof of this theorem uses some deep results in algebraic topology


HOMOTOPICALLY NON-TRIVIAL MAPS WITH SMALL K-DILATION
3
to guarantee that certain high-order suspensions are homotopically non-trivial. I
would like to thank Haynes Miller for helping me to ﬁnd the relevant results in the
topology literature.
Theorem 1. For every N ≥2, there are inﬁnitely many M so that there are
homotopically non-trivial maps from SM to SN with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
Proof. When i = 8j + 1, the homotopy group πi(SO) is equal to Z2. The stable
J-homomorphism maps πi(SO) to the ith stable stem of the homotopy groups of
spheres. The image of the J-homomorphism was studied by Adams in [1]. When
i = 8j + 1, he proved that the stable J-homomorphism is injective. Its image is
a copy of Z2. This image contains a non-trivial element in πi+n(Sn), for large n.
It turns out that this non-trivial element is the suspension of a class in πi+2(S2).
This statement is made clearly in the introduction to the paper [3], and the proof
appears in the older paper [2]. For each i = 8j + 1, let ai be a homotopy class in
πi+2(S2) whose suspension is the non-trivial element in the image J(πi(SO)). In
particular, the p-fold suspension Σpai is non-trivial for every p and every i.
Now let N be any integer at least 2. For each i = 8j + 1 greater than 2N −6,
consider the class ΣN−2ai in πi+N(SN). We let M = N +i. Each of these homotopy
classes is non-trivial. In the language of Proposition 1, we have p = N −2, m = i+2,
and n = 2. The condition that i is greater than 2N −6 exactly guarantees that
3 > n + (n/m)p. Therefore, each of these homotopy classes can be realized with
arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
□
This proof constructs homotopically non-trivial maps from SM to SN with ar-
bitrarily small 3-dilation for many pairs (M, N).
For example, when N = 3,
we can take M = 4, 12, 20, 28, 36, and so on; and when N = 4, we can take
M = 13, 21, 29, 37, and so on.
2. Lower bounds for k-dilation
In this section, we survey several lower bounds for the k-dilation of mappings.
We begin by recalling the theorem of Tsui and Wang mentioned in the introduction.
Theorem. (Tsui and Wang, [7]) Let f be a C1 map from Sm to Sn, where m ≥2.
If the 2-dilation of f is less than 1, then f is nullhomotopic.
The proof by Tsui and Wang uses the mean curvature ﬂow to deform the graph
of the map f as a submanifold of Sm×Sn. They prove that the mean curvature ﬂow
converges to the graph of a constant function and that at each time t the ﬂowed
submanifold is the graph of a map ft. Therefore, ft provides a homotopy from t to
a constant map.
Earlier, Gromov had proved a slightly weaker theorem in the same spirit. He
proved that for each m and n, there exists a number ǫ(m, n) > 0, so that any C1
map from Sm to Sn with 2-dilation less than ǫ(m, n) is null-homotopic. Gromov’s
proof is completely diﬀerent from the proof of Tsui and Wang. He approaches the
map from Sm to Sn as a family of maps from S2 to Sn. If the 2-dilation is less
than ǫ, then each image of S2 has area less than 4πǫ. Gromov uses the Riemann
mapping theorem to change coordinates on the domain so that each map in the
family has Dirichlet energy less than Cǫ.
Then he uses the borderline Sobolev
inequality, which bounds the BMO norm of each map in the family by Cǫ. Using
the bound on the BMO norm, he constructs a homotopy from the initial family of


4
LARRY GUTH
maps to a family of constant maps. This argument is sketched on page 179 of the
long essay [5].
Gromov’s estimates are less sharp than those of Tsui and Wang, but he is able
to push them through with much weaker hypotheses. For example, Gromov proves
that if f maps Sm to Sn with |Λ2df|Lm−1+δ < ǫ(m, n, δ) then f is null-homotopic.
Gromov’s method also applies to more manifolds.
He proves that for any two
compact simply connected Riemannian manifolds M and N there is a constant
ǫ(M, N) so that any map f : M →N with 2-dilation less than ǫ(M, N) is null-
homotopic. (Both these results are special cases of the Corollary on page 230 of
[5].)
Lower bounds for the k-dilation with k greater than 2 are much rarer. We begin
with a very elementary example. If a C1 map f from Sn to Sn is homotopically
non-trivial, then it has n-dilation at least 1. This result follows because a map with
n-dilation equal to 1 −ǫ has an image with volume at most (1 −ǫ)V ol(Sn). Such
a map is not surjective, and so it is null-homotopic.
Gromov also proved lower bounds for the k-dilation of maps with non-zero Hopf
invariant. The following argument appears in [4] on pages 358-359.
Theorem. (Gromov) Let f be a map from S4n−1 to S2n with 2n-dilation D. Then
the norm of the Hopf invariant of f is bounded by C(n)D2. Since the Hopf invari-
ant is an integer, any map with non-zero Hopf invariant has 2n-dilation at least
C(n)−1/2.
Proof. Let ω be a 2n-form on S2n with
R
ω = 1. The pullback f ∗(ω) is a closed
2n-form on S4n−1. Since H2n(S4n−1) = 0, this form is exact. We let Pf ∗(ω) denote
any primitive of f ∗(ω). Then the Hopf invariant of f is equal to
R
S4n−1 Pf ∗(ω) ∧
f ∗(ω).
During this proof, we let C denote a constant depending on n that may change
from line to line. We can assume that |ω| < C at every point of S2n. The norm of
f ∗(ω) is bounded by CD pointwise. Therefore, the L2 norm of f ∗(ω) is bounded
by CD. Using Hodge theory, we can choose Pf ∗(ω) to be perpendicular to all
of the exact (2n-1)-forms. For this choice, the L2 norm of Pf ∗(ω) is bounded by
λ−1/2CD, where λ is the smallest eigenvalue of the Laplacian on exact (2n)-forms.
The eigenvalue λ is greater than zero and depends only on n. Finally, the norm
of the Hopf invariant is bounded by |f ∗(ω)|L2|Pf ∗(ω)|L2, which is bounded by
C(n)D2.
□
The method above can be generalized to many non-torsion homotopy classes.
For more information, see Gromov’s discussion in [5], pages 220-223.
The methods outlined here leave many open questions. If a is a torsion homotopy
class in some homotopy group πm(Sn), I don’t know any way to lower bound the
3-dilation of maps in the homotopy class a. For example, the 100-fold suspension of
the Hopf map is a non-trivial element in π103(S102). According to Proposition 1, it
can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 69-dilation. It would be interesting
to know whether it can be realized by maps with arbitrarily small 3-dilation.
3. A filtration on homotopy groups
In this section, we deﬁne a ﬁltration Vkπm(X) which measures which homotopy
classes in πm(X) can be realized with arbitrarily small k-dilation. We derive some


HOMOTOPICALLY NON-TRIVIAL MAPS WITH SMALL K-DILATION
5
easy formal properties of this ﬁltration. In the next section, we will calculate it in
some examples and show that it can be non-trivial.
As a ﬁrst step, we deﬁne Vkπm(W) when W is a ﬁnite simplicial complex. We
put a piecewise Riemannian metric on W by equipping each simplex with the metric
of an equilateral simplex in Euclidean space with edges of length 1. We then deﬁne
Vkπm(W) to be the set of homotopy classes in πm(W) that can be realized by maps
Sm →W with arbitrarily small k-dilation.
The set Vkπm(W) is in fact a subgroup of πm(W). If a lies in Vkπm(W), then
let fi be a sequence of maps from Sm to W in the homotopy class a with k-dilation
tending to zero. Let I be a reﬂection, mapping Sm to itself with degree -1, and
taking the basepoint of Sm to itself. Then the maps fi ◦I have k-dilations tending
to zero and lie in the homotopy class −a. Therefore −a lies in Vkπm(W). Next,
suppose that a and b lie in Vkπm(W). Again, let fi be a sequence of (pointed)
maps in the class a with k-dilation tending to zero, and let gi be a sequence of
(pointed) maps in the homotopy class b with k-dilation tending to zero. Let I be
a map from Sm to Sm ∨Sm with degree (1,1). Let hi be the map from Sm ∨Sm
to W whose restriction to the ﬁrst copy of Sm is equal to fi and whose restriction
to the second copy of Sm is equal to gi. Then the sequence hi ◦I has k-dilation
tending to zero. Each map in the sequence lies in the homotopy class a + b. So
a + b lies in Vkπm(W).
The sets Vkπm(W) are nested, with Vkπm(W) ⊂Vk+1πm(W). To see this, we
express the k-dilation of a map in terms of the singular values of its derivative. Let
f be a piecewise C1 map from Sm to W. Suppose that the singular values of df at
a point are equal to 0 ≤s1 ≤... ≤sm. Then the norm |Λkdf| at that point is
equal to sm−k+1...sm. Therefore, |Λk+1df| ≤|Λkdf|
k+1
k . If a map f has k-dilation
D, then the (k+1)-dilation of f is at most D
k+1
k . In particular, if fi is a sequence
of maps with k-dilation tending to zero, then the (k+1)-dilation of fi also tends to
zero. Therefore, Vkπm(W) ⊂Vk+1πm(W). Any map from Sm has (m + 1)-dilation
zero, and so Vm+1πm(W) is always the whole homotopy group πm(W).
The last paragraph shows that the sequence of groups Vkπm(W) is a ﬁltration
of πm(W).
0 = V1πm(W) ⊂V2πm(W) ⊂... ⊂Vmπm(W) ⊂Vm+1πm(W) = πm(W).
The ﬁltration Vk behaves naturally under mappings in the following sense. If
F : W →V is a continuous pointed mapping between ﬁnite simplicial complexes,
then F∗: πm(W) →πm(V ) takes Vkπm(W) into Vkπm(V ). To prove this, ﬁrst
approximate F by a PL map with some ﬁnite Lipshitz constant L. Let a be a class
in Vkπm(W), realized by mappings fi : Sm →W with k-dilation tending to zero.
The map F ◦fi from Sm to V has k-dilation less than Lk times the k-dilation of
fi, so the the sequence F ◦fi has k-dilation tending to zero. Each map F ◦fi lies
in the homotopy class F∗(a). Therefore, F∗(a) lies in Vkπm(V ).
Now we deﬁne Vkπm(X) for an arbitrary space X. A homotopy class a in πm(X)
belongs to Vkπm(X) if there is a ﬁnite simplicial complex W and a map F : W →X
so that a lies in the image F∗(Vkπm(W)). In case X is a ﬁnite simplicial complex,
this deﬁnition agrees with our ﬁrst deﬁnition because of the mapping property of
Vk proved in the last paragraph. As above, Vkπm(X) deﬁnes a ﬁltration of πm(X).
Also, if f : X →Y is any continuous map of spaces, then f∗maps Vkπm(X) into
Vkπm(Y ). From this mapping property, it follows that the ﬁltration Vkπm(X) is a
homotopy invariant.


6
LARRY GUTH
We can rephrase the main theorems of this paper in the language of the ﬁltration
Vkπm(Sn). The theorem of Tsui and Wang implies that V2πm(Sn) = 0 for m ≥2.
Theorem 1 says that for each n ≥2, the group V3πm(Sn) is non-zero for inﬁnitely
many m. Theorem 2 says that V4π7(S4) is exactly the torsion subgroup of π7(S4),
which is isomorphic to Z12.
4. Examples of the Vk Filtration
In this section, we use the tools from sections 1 and 2 to compute the ﬁltration
Vkπm(Sn) for a few small values of m and n. For other values of m and n, we obtain
some partial information about the ﬁltration. The most interesting example is a
computation of V4π7(S4). We use the lists of homotopy groups of spheres and the
suspension maps between them given in [6] on pages 39-42. According to the the
theorem of Tsui and Wang, V2πm(Sn) is zero in all the examples below, so we will
only discuss Vk for k ≥3.
The ﬁltration of πm(S2)
Any element of πm(S2) lies in V3πm(S2), because any smooth map from Sm to
S2 has 3-dilation equal to zero.
The ﬁltration of π4(S3)
The group π4(S3) is isomorphic to Z2, and the non-trivial element is given by
the suspension of the Hopf ﬁbration from S3 to S2. Applying Proposition 1, this
non-trivial element lies in V3π4(S3).
The ﬁltration of π5(S3)
The group π5(S3) is isomorphic to Z2, and the non-trivial element is the sus-
pension of a class in π4(S2). Applying Proposition 1, this non-trivial element lies
in V3π5(S3).
The ﬁltration of π6(S3)
The group π6(S3) is isomorphic to Z12. One non-trival element is the suspen-
sion of a class in π5(S2). Applying Proposition 1, this non-trivial element lies in
V3π6(S3). I don’t know whether the other non-trivial elements lie in V3π6(S3).
The ﬁltration of π5(S4)
The group π5(S4) is isomorphic to Z2, and the non-trivial element is given by
the double suspension of the Hopf ﬁbration from S3 to S2. Applying Proposition 1,
this non-trivial element lies in V4π5(S4). I don’t know whether it lies in V3π5(S4).
The ﬁltration of π6(S4)
The group π6(S4) is isomorphic to Z2, and the non-trivial element is the double
suspension of a class in π4(S2). Applying Proposition 1, this non-trivial element
lies in V4π6(S4). I don’t know whether it lies in V3π6(S4).
The ﬁltration of π7(S4)
The group π7(S4) is isomorphic to Z ⊕Z12. The Hopf invariant gives a map
H : π7(S4) →Z. In section 2, following Gromov, we proved that V4π7(S4) lies
in the kernel of H. The kernel of H is isomorphic to Z12. The suspension map is
an isomophism from π6(S3) onto the kernel of H, as follows from the long exact
sequence of the Hopf ﬁbration S3 →S7 →S4. (This fact is stated in [6] on page 2.)
Therefore, every element in the kernel of H is a suspension. Applying Proposition
1, we see that the kernel of H lies in V4π7(S4). Therefore, V4π7(S4) is exactly the
kernel of H. This proves the second theorem in the introduction.


HOMOTOPICALLY NON-TRIVIAL MAPS WITH SMALL K-DILATION
7
In addition, one non-trivial element in π7(S4) is a double suspension of an el-
ement in π5(S2). Applying Proposition 1 to this element, we see that it lies in
V3π7(S4). I don’t know whether the other torsion elements of π7(S4) lie in V3π7(S4).
References
[1] Adams, J. F.; On the groups J(X) - IV; Topology 5 (1966), 21-71.
[2] Curtis, E. B. ; Some non-zero homotopy groups of spheres; Bulletin of the American Mathe-
matical Society 75 (1969) 541-544.
[3] Davis, D. and Mahowald, M.; The image of the stable J-homomorphism; Topology 28 (1989)
no. 1, 39-58.
[4] Gromov, M.; Metric Structures for Riemannian and Non-Riemannian Spaces, Birkhauser,
Boston, 1998.
[5] Gromov, M.; Carnot-Caratheodory spaces as seen from within, in Sub-Riemannian Geometry,
ed. Bellaiche, A. and Risler, J.-J.; Birkhauser, Basel, 1996.
[6] Toda, H.; Composition Methods in Homotopy Groups of Spheres, Annals of Mathematics
Studies, Number 49; Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1962.
[7] Tsui, M.-P., and Wang, M.-T.; Mean curvature ﬂows and isotopy of maps between spheres;
Comm. Pure Appl. Math 57 (2004) no. 8, 1110-1126.
Department of Mathematics, Stanford, Stanford CA, 94305 USA
E-mail address: lguth@math.stanford.edu
