arXiv:math/0702066v2  [math.DG]  27 Jan 2008
MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND
STEENROD SQUARES
LARRY GUTH
Abstract. If F is a family of mod 2 k-cycles in the unit n-ball, we lower
bound the maximal volume of any cycle in F in terms of the homology class
of F in the space of all cycles. We give examples to show that these lower
bounds are fairly sharp.
This paper is about minimax estimates for the volumes of cycles in complicated
families. The simplest example of a minimax problem is a classical result about
curves in the unit disk. First consider the family of vertical lines in the unit disk.
The longest line in the family has length 2. Then consider any other family of
curves that sweeps out the unit disk. One of the curves in the other family must
still have length at least 2. We illustrate the situation in Figure 1.
Figure 1
We can write this result in the following form, which explains why it is called a
minimax estimate.
inf
F ∈F sup
C∈F
length(C) = 2.
In this equation, F denotes the set of all 1-parameter families of curves in the unit
disk which sweep out the disk. The letter F denotes a particular 1-parameter family
of curves in F, and the letter C denotes a curve in the family F.
In this paper, we study more general minimax problems that may involve very
high-parameter families. For example, we will study a minimax problem for p-
parameter families of planar curves for any integer p and compute the asymptotic
behavior as p tends to inﬁnity. More generally, we will study analogous questions
for k-dimensional surfaces in the unit n-ball for any k < n.
1


2
LARRY GUTH
We let Z(k, n) denote the space of mod 2 relative k-cycles in the unit n-ball.
(More precisely, we use the space of ﬂat k-cycles. In Section 1, we give a self-
contained deﬁnition of this space.)
By a family of k-cycles, we mean a continuous map F from a simplicial complex
to Z(k, n). If α is a cohomology class in H∗(Z(k, n), Z2), we say that F detects α
if F ∗(α) ̸= 0. Then we deﬁne F(α) to be the set of all families of cycles that detect
the cohomology class α. We deﬁne a minimax volume for the cohomology class α
by the following formula.
V(α) :=
inf
F ∈F(α) sup
C∈F
Volume(C).
This formula deﬁnes inﬁnitely many minimax volumes V(α), and we will inves-
tigate how the minimax volume depends on the cohomology class.
The ﬁrst cohomology class that we will use measures whether a family of cycles
sweeps out the ball. In Section 1, we will deﬁne precisely what it means for a family
of cycles to sweep out the ball. Suppose that z is a mod 2 (n-k)-cycle in the space
Z(k, n). There is a cohomology class a(k, n) in Hn−k(Z(k, n), Z2) whose pairing
< a(k, n), [z] > is equal to 1 if the family z sweeps out the unit ball (mod 2) and
is equal to 0 if it doesn’t. We call a(k, n) the fundamental cohomology class of
Z(k, n). Determining V(a(k, n)) is the classical minimax problem for families of
k-cycles that sweep out the unit n-ball. For this problem, there are good results
due to Almgren ([2]) and Gromov ([5], [7]), which we describe in detail in Section
2.
We get other cohomology classes by applying cohomology operations to the fun-
damental cohomology class a(k, n). The next simplest cohomology classes are cup
powers of a(k, n). Recently, Gromov studied the problem of estimating V(a(k, n)p)
in Section 8 of [7]. He proved the following theorem.
Theorem 1. (Gromov) There are constants 0 < c(n) < C(n) so that the following
estimate holds.
c(n)p
n−k
n
≤V(a(k, n)p) ≤C(n)p
n−k
n .
In this paper, we will reprove Theorem 1 in detail. We will construct an explicit
family of cycles that detects a(k, n)p, check that each cycle in the family has volume
at most C(n)p
n−k
n , and prove that this value is nearly optimal.
The main goal of the paper is to extend this analysis from cup powers to tow-
ers of Steenrod squares. Recall that Sqi denotes the Steenrod square cohomology
operation that maps HN(X, Z2) to HN+i(X, Z2) for any space X. For background
on Steenrod squares, see the chapter on them in [11]. If α is a cohomology class
in HN(X, Z2), we write Sqiα to denote SqN−iα ∈H2N−i(X, Z2). We write Sq2
i α
to denote Sqi[Sqiα], and in a similar way we deﬁne Sqp
i and SqiSqj. Our sec-
ond theorem estimates the minimax volume for any cohomology class of the form
SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n), where Q0, ..., Qn−k−1 are any non-negative integers.
Theorem 2. For each ǫ > 0, there is a constant c(n, ǫ) > 0, and there is a constant
C(n) independent of ǫ, so that the following estimate holds.
c(n, ǫ)
n−k−1
Y
i=0
(2 −ǫ)
n−k−i
n−i
Qi ≤V(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)) ≤C(n)
n−k−1
Y
i=0
2
n−k−i
n−i
Qi.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
3
These formulas are pretty complicated, so we make a few comments about them.
Let α be a cohomology class SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n) lying in Hd(Z(k, n), Z2). At
ﬁrst, we might hope to estimate V (α) in terms of the dimension d. The formula in
Theorem 2 implies that V (α) may be as large as d
n−k
n
or as small as d
1
k+1 depending
on the values of Q0, ..., Qn−k−1. Knowing d gives us some idea of V(α), but our
best guess would be subject to an error that is polynomial in d. Theorem 2 gives
us an estimate for V(α) which is accurate up to an error of order dǫ for any ǫ > 0.
The reader may want to know what fraction of the cohomology ring of Z(k, n)
is covered by Theorem 2. The homotopy groups of spaces of cycles were studied
by Almgren in his thesis [1]. Almgren proved that the space of relative integral
k-cycles in the unit n-ball has homotopy groups πn−k = Z and all other homotopy
groups zero. I believe that Almgren’s argument should apply to the space Z(k, n)
of mod 2 ﬂat cycles. The argument should prove that πi(Z(k, n)) is equal to Z2
for i = n −k and zero otherwise.
Unfortunately, this argument is not written
down anywhere as far as I know. I hope to write an exposition of it in the future.
If Almgren’s argument applies, then Z(k, n) is weak homotopic to the Eilenberg-
Maclane space K(Z2, n−k). The mod 2 cohomology ring of the space K(Z2, n−k)
was determined by Serre in [18]. The smallest non-zero cohomology group is Hn−k
which is equal to Z2. We call the generator of this group a. The entire cohomology
ring of K(Z2, n −k) is a free Z2 algebra with generators SqQ1
1 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a, where
Qi ≥0 are any numbers. (See [11] for more information.)
To get a sense of what it means for a family of cycles to detect a certain co-
homology class, consider the following topological properties. First suppose that
a family of cycles detects a(k, n). In other words, the family of cycles sweeps out
the unit n-ball. This implies that one of the cycles must go through the center of
the ball. More generally, if we pick any point x in the unit ball, one of the cycles
must go through x. Next suppose that a family of cycles detects a(k, n)p. If we
pick any p points x1, ..., xp in the unit n-ball, then one of the cycles in the family
must go through all p points. The lower bounds in Theorem 1 exploit this property.
The analogue of this property for Steenrod squares is a little bit more complicated.
Suppose that a family of cycles detects Sqia(k, n). If we pick two particular points,
x1 and x2, then our family may not contain a cycle that goes through them both.
But if we pick a continuous map f from Si to the unit ball, then we can ﬁnd a
point θ ∈Si so that a cycle from our family goes through both f(θ) and f(−θ).
There is an analogous property for a family of cycles that detects SqQ
i a(k, n), but
it becomes pretty complicated. Roughly speaking, the lower bounds in Theorem 2
exploit this property.
To give some context for our theorems, we consider some examples of families
of cycles. The most interesting examples are families of algebraic varieties. These
examples are discussed more in Section 6 of the paper, where we prove the claims
made in the discussion below. The one thing we don’t prove is that the complex
algebraic hypersurfaces are an honest family of ﬂat cycles - therefore, Example 5
below is not completely rigorous.
Example 1. Vertical lines in the unit disk.
This is the example that began the paper. The family F is parametrized by
[−1, 1], with F(t) being the line x = t intersected with the unit disk. Since F(−1)
and F(1) are both the empty cycle, we can think of the family as a map from the


4
LARRY GUTH
circle to Z(1, 2). Because the vertical lines sweep out the disk, the class F ∗(a(1, 2))
is the non-zero class in H1(S1, Z2). Since each vertical line has length at most 2,
it follows that V(a(1, 2)) ≤2, and this inequality is sharp.
Example 2. Sets of p vertical lines in the disk.
Start with the open p-simplex −1 < t1 < ... < tp < 1.
Deﬁne F on the
open simplex by taking F(t1, ..., tp) to be the union of vertical lines x = ti for
1 ≤i ≤p. By continuity, F extends to map the closed simplex into Z(1, 2). The
image of this map turns out to be a p-cycle in Z(1, 2) that detects a(1, 2)p. Every
p-tuple of vertical lines has total length at most 2p, and so this example shows that
V(a(1, 2)p) ≤2p.
According to Theorem 1, V(a(1, 2)p) ∼p1/2. For large p, this family of cycles
has much longer curves than necessary. Our next example shows how to improve
it.
Example 3. Planar real algebraic curves.
Let P(x, y) be a real polynomial of degree at most d. If P is not uniformly zero,
then we deﬁne F(P) to be the intersection of the real algebraic curve {(x, y)|P(x, y) =
0} with the unit disk.
We should mention that some of these polynomials have no solutions. For ex-
ample, P(x, y) could be 1, or it could be 1 + x2 + y2. In these cases, F(P) is the
empty cycle. Some of the curves in our family have one connected component, but
some have more than one connected component, while others are empty. In spite
of the changing topology, the family of real algebraic curves is continuous in the
ﬂat topology. (We prove this statement in Section 6.)
The space of all real polynomials of degree at most d is a real vector space
of dimension
 d+2
2

. Two polynomials deﬁne the same curve if one is a constant
multiple of the other. Therefore, we can think of the space of degree d curves as a
family parameterized by RPD(d), where D(d) =
 d+2
2

−1 = (1/2)(d2 + 3d). This
family detects the class a(1, 2)p for any p ≤D(d). Also, the length of a degree
d algebraic curve in the unit disk is less than 4d. Therefore, V(a(1, 2)D(d)) < 4d.
Since D(d) is roughly d2, it follows that V(a(1, 2)p) < 10p1/2.
According to Theorem 1, V(a(1, 2)p) ∼p1/2, and so the family of degree d curves
is roughly the optimal way of detecting a(1, 2)p.
Example 4. Real algebraic hypersurfaces.
The last construction generalizes to real algebraic hypersurfaces in any dimen-
sion. The space of degree d real algebraic hypersurfaces in the unit n-ball can be
parametrized by RPD(d,n) for a dimension D(d, n) on the order of dn. It detects
a(n −1, n)p for any p ≤D(d, n). Each degree d hypersurface in the unit ball has
volume at most C(n)d. These examples show that V(a(n −1, n)p) ≤C(n)p1/n,
which is roughly optimal according to Theorem 1.
Example 5. Complex algebraic hypersurfaces.
The same construction applies to complex algebraic hypersurfaces. If n is even,
then we can think of the unit n-ball as the unit ball in Cn/2, and we can look at the
degree d complex hypersurfaces. These are parametrized by CPD(d,n/2), where the
dimension D(d, n/2) is on the order of dn/2. Each degree d complex hypersurface
in the unit n-ball has volume at most C(n)d. Therefore, we get an upper bound


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
5
on minimax volumes V(a(n −2, n)p) ≤C(n)p2/n for even n. This upper bound is
roughly optimal according to Theorem 1.
We can also think of complex hypersurfaces as integral cycles. We discuss the
situation for integral cycles in Appendix 2.
Example 6. Translates of real algebraic planar curves in R3.
This example is a modiﬁcation of the family of degree d real algebraic planar
curves.
Recall that the degree d curves formed a family F(d, 2) : RPD(d,2) →
Z(1, 2), detecting the cohomology class a(1, 2)D(d,2). Now we deﬁne a new family
of 1-cycles in the 3-ball by using translates of the degree d curves. The new family is
parametrized by RPD(d,2)×[−1, 1]. Our new family F is deﬁned by taking F(p, t) to
be the restriction to the unit 3-ball of the product F(d, 2)(p)×{t} ⊂B2(1)×[−1, 1].
If t = ±1, then F(p, t) is the empty cycle, so F extends to a continuous family
parametrized by RPD(d,2) × S1. The family F detects SqQ
1 a(1, 3) for any Q with
2Q ≤D(d, 2). Each 1-cycle in F has length at most Cd. Since D(d, 2) is roughly
d2, this example shows that V(SqQ
1 a(1, 3)) ≤C2Q/2. According to Theorem 2,
this example is approximately sharp in the sense that for any ǫ, we can choose a
constant c(n, ǫ) > 0 so that V(SqQ
1 a(1, 3)) ≥c(n, ǫ)(2 −ǫ)Q/2.
Example 7. Products of previous examples.
We can also take products of previous examples. For example, we can look at
the product F(d, 2) × F(d, 2), which deﬁnes a family of 2-cycles in the unit 4-ball
parametrized by RPD(d,2) × RPD(d,2). This family detects the class a(2, 4)p for any
p ≤D(d, 2). Each surface in the family has area at most Cd2. This example shows
that V(a(2, 4)p) ≤Cp. According to Theorem 1, the actual value of V(a(2, 4)p) is
much smaller, on the order of p1/2, which can be achieved by looking at complex
hypersurfaces. Similarly, most other products lead to families of cycles that are far
from optimal with respect to our minimax problem.
Now that we have seen some examples of families of cycles, we discuss the proofs
of the lower bounds in Theorems 1 and 2.
Lower bounds for V(a(k, n)) for general k were ﬁrst proven by Almgren using
his version of Morse theory on the space of cycles [2]. He proved that a family
of k-cycles sweeping out the unit n-sphere must contain a cycle with volume at
least equal to that of the unit k-sphere. This statement implies a lower bound for
V(a(k, n)). Almgren’s argument involves a lot of geometric measure theory. In [5],
Gromov gave a lower bound for V(a(k, n)) by using the isoperimetric inequality
repeatedly. We include Gromov’s argument in Section 2.
The lower bounds in Theorem 1 are proven by combining a lower bound for
V(a(k, n)) with Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory. To give the idea, we explain how
to bound V(a(1, 2)p). Let B1, ..., Bp be disjoint disks inside the unit disk, each with
radius r ∼p−1/2.
Let S(i) ⊂Z(1, 2) be the subset of 1-cycles z ∈Z(1, 2) so that z ∩Bi has length
at most r. (We use the letters S(i) as an abbreviation for “cycles which are small
in Bi”.) The dashed curve in Figure 2 illustrates a cycle in S(1). This cycle does
not belong to S(2) or S(3).


6
LARRY GUTH
B 1
B 2
B 3
Figure 2
Any family of curves that sweeps out the unit disk must also sweep out each Bi.
By scaling the classical result at the beginning of this introduction, we know that
any family of curves that sweeps out Bi must contain a curve of length at least 2r.
Therefore, the set S(i) does not contain a family of curves sweeping out the unit
disk. In other words, the restriction of a(1, 2) to S(i) vanishes.
According to Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory, the class a(1, 2)p vanishes on the
union ∪p
i=1S(i). (For a reference on Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory, see the ﬁrst
chapter of [4]. The result about the cup powers is proven on pages 2-3.) Therefore,
if F is a family of cycles that detects a(1, 2)p, then F must contain a cycle C which
is not in any S(i). In other words, for each i, C ∩Bi has length at least r. Since
the disks Bi are disjoint, the total length of C must be at least pr ∼p1/2.
To prove the lower bounds in Theorem 2, we need an analogue of Lusternik-
Schnirelmann theory involving Steenrod squares instead of cup powers. The fun-
damental topological fact about cup squares that we exploited is the following
vanishing result. If α is a cohomology class in H∗(X), and V1, V2 are open sets in
X with the property that α|V1 = 0 and α|V2 = 0, then the cup square α2 vanishes
on the union V1∪V2. We prove a generalization of this vanishing result for Steenrod
squares.
Vanishing Lemma. Let X be a simplicial complex, and let α be a cohomology
class in Hp(X, Z2). Let π : Si × X →X be the projection onto the second factor.
Suppose that V ⊂Si×X is an open subset. For any θ ∈Si, let V (θ) ⊂X be the set
{x ∈X|(θ, x) ∈V }. Let P[V ] = ∩θ∈Si[V (θ) ∪V (−θ)]. Under these assumptions,
if π∗(α) vanishes on V , then Sqiα vanishes on P[V ].


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
7
We now try to describe the proof of the lower bounds in Theorem 2, comparing
each step to what happened in Theorem 1. Suppose ﬁrst that we have a family of
cycles that detects a(k, n)2. Suppose that P is any hyperplane through the origin,
and let B1 and B2 denote the two components of Bn(1) −P. By using Lusternik-
Schnirelmann theory, we can ﬁnd a cycle in our family that meets both B1 and B2
in a substantial volume. Now suppose instead that we have a family of cycles that
detects Sq1a(k, n). If we take a hyperplane P through the origin, the corresponding
statement is false. Instead, we have to take a 1-parameter family of hyperplanes
through the origin, parametrized by a copy of RP1 ⊂RPn−1. For one of these
hyperplanes P, we can ﬁnd a cycle in our family that meets each half of Bn(1) −P
in a substantial volume.
To deal with a class like SqP
i a(k, n), we have to iterate the procedure above. As
a warmup, suppose that a family detects a(k, n)4. Then we cut the ball up into 4
pieces in a 2-step process as follows. First we pick a hyperplane P that cuts the ball
into two pieces, B1 and B2. Then we pick a hyperplane P1 that cuts B1 into two
pieces, B11 and B12. Similary, we pick a hyperplane P2 that cuts B2 into two pieces.
We end up with four pieces: B11, B12, B21, and B22. Using Lusternik-Schnirelmann
theory, we can ﬁnd a cycle in our family that meets each of the four pieces in a
substantial volume. Using this argument, we get a lower bound for V(a(k, n)4).
The lower bound that we get depends on our choice of planes. To get the best
lower bound, we want the pieces Bij to be as thick as possible.
Finally suppose a family detects Sq2
1a(k, n). We cut the ball into 4 pieces in
a 2-step process.
First, we pick a 1-parameter family of hyperplanes making a
linear copy of RP1 ⊂RPn−1. Then the ball is cut into two pieces, B1 and B2,
along one of these hyperplanes, but we don’t get to choose which hyperplane. Now,
for B1, we get to choose a (possibly diﬀerent) 1-parameter family of hyperplanes,
RP1 ⊂RPn−1. Then the set B1 is cut into two pieces, B11 and B12, along one of
the hyperplanes in the family, but again we don’t get to control which one. Then we
do the same for B2. At the end of the cutting process we have divided the ball into
four convex sets. Using the Steenrod square vanishing lemma, we can prove that
our family contains a cycle that meets each of the four convex sets in a substantial
volume. Notice that we didn’t get to choose the four sets, as we did in the case of
a(k, n)4 - we only got to choose the sequence of 1-parameter families of hyperplanes.
Applying the Steenrod vanishing lemma, we get a lower bound for V(Sq2
1a(k, n)),
depending on the shapes of the four pieces. In order to get the best lower bound,
we want to choose our sequence of 1-parameter families of hyperplanes in order to
guarantee that the four pieces are as thick as possible.
The proof of the lower bounds in Theorem 2 combines a topology argument
based on the Steenrod vanishing lemma with a geometry argument estimating the
sizes of the pieces that appear in the above construction. This proof is the longest
and hardest part of the paper.
We now return to the upper bounds in Theorems 1 and 2. Some of the upper
bounds can be proven using families of real algebraic cycles, as we discussed above.
For example, the real algebraic hypersurfaces can be used to prove the upper bounds
in Theorem 1 when k = n −1. In general, to prove the upper bounds, we construct
some new families of cycles.
In order to explain the idea, we illustrate the construction in the case k = 1, n =
2. We recall Example 2 above, the family of sets of p vertical lines. This family of


8
LARRY GUTH
cycles detects the class a(1, 2)p, but it has maximal length on the order of p. Our
construction is a way to modify the family in Example 2, cutting out excess length
to produce a new family of curves with length on the order of p1/2.
Let L be a lattice in R2 with side-length p−1/2.
We deﬁne a map Ψ which
squeezes most of R2 into the 1-skeleton of L. Our map Ψ is periodic, so it suﬃces
to deﬁne it on a single square Q of the lattice L. The boundary of Q is contained
in the 1-skeleton of L, and our map is the identity on the boundary of Q. Let Q(ǫ)
denote a square with the same center as Q but with side-length ǫp−1/2. The map Ψ
takes Q(ǫ) linearly onto Q. Finally, the map Ψ retracts Q−Q(ǫ) into the boundary
of Q.
We now use the map Ψ to “bend” the cycles in Example 2. First we rotate
Example 2, so that each cycle consists of p parallel lines at a generic angle. We
then apply the map Ψ to get a new family. Each cycle in the new family is a union
of at most p 1-cycles Ψ(L1) + ... + Ψ(Lp), where Li is a line at our generic angle.
The eﬀect of the map Ψ on a line L is illustrated below.
Figure 3
On the left side of Figure 3, we see the intersection of the unit disk with a line
L. On the right side, we see the intersection of the unit disk with Ψ(L). The
scale of the lattice in Figure 3 corresponds to p ∼30, so the reader should imagine
performing the operation above on 30 parallel lines.
The point of replacing Li by Ψ(Li) is that the curve Ψ(Li) is contained mainly
in the 1-skeleton of the lattice L. Each cycle Ψ(Li) lies in the 1-skeleton of L except
possibly for one segment of length at most 2p−1/2. The cycles Ψ(Li), (i = 1, ..., p)
overlap a great deal. Because we are working with mod 2 cycles, we can cancel the
overlaps and reduce the total length.
The sum Pp
i=1 Ψ(Li) lies inside of the 1-skeleton of L except for at most p
segments of length at most 2p−1/2. The total length of all these short segments is
at most 2p1/2. On the other hand, after cancelling all the overlaps, the portion of
our sum inside the 1-skeleton of L has length at most the length of the 1-skeleton,
which is on the order of p1/2.
By modifying this bend-and-cancel construction, we prove all the upper bounds
in Theorems 1 and 2. To prove Theorem 2, we need to use a sequence of mappings
like Ψ with lattices at diﬀerent scales.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
9
To ﬁnish the introduction, we mention some open questions connected with
families of real algebraic cycles. There is a general principle in geometry/topology
that algebraic varieties do a good job of minimizing various things.
A number
of examples are given in Arnold’s expository essay [3]. It would be interesting to
know whether the optimal minimax volumes are realized by families of real algebraic
cycles.
For example, we know that the family F(d) of all degree d real algebraic planar
curves detects the cohomology class a(1, 2)D(d) for D(d) = (1/2)(d2 +3d). Is it true
that the minimax volume V(a(1, 2)D(d)) is the maximal length of a degree d curve
intersected with the unit disk?
It would also be interesting to know whether we could prove all the upper bounds
in Theorems 1 and 2 using families of real algebraic cycles. By work of Lawson and
Lam, the topology of the space of real algebraic k-cycles in Rn is known. (The
complex case was done by Lawson in [13]. The real case was done by Lam in his
thesis [12]. The work is also described in Lawson’s expository article [14], page 93.)
The space of real algebraic k-cycles in Rn has πi equal to Z2 for i = n −k and πi
equal to zero otherwise. In particular, their work implies that every cohomology
class of the form a(k, n)p or of the form SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n) can be detected
by a family of real algebraic cycles. It would be interesting to know the smallest
degree d so that a given cohomology class can be detected by a family of algebraic
cycles of degree at most d. We call this degree D(α).
An algebraic k-cycle of degree d meets the unit n-ball in volume at most C(k, n)d.
Therefore we get a lower bound D(α) ≥c(k, n)V(α). (Applying Theorem 1 and
2, we then get lower bounds for D(a(k, n)p) and D(SqQa(k, n)).)
It would be
interesting to know if there is a converse bound D(α) ≤C(k, n)V(α). If it exists,
such a bound would verify the philosophy that algebraic objects are eﬃcient at
solving geometric problems. Our results show that this converse inequality holds
in a couple of cases including the case α = a(n −1, n)p.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we state the problem precisely.
In Section 2, we give Gromov’s lower bound for V(a(k, n)) using the isoperimet-
ric inequality. In Section 3, we prove lower bounds for V(a(k, n)p) by combining
Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory with the result in Section 2. In Section 4, we prove
lower bounds for V(SqQa(k, n)) using our Vanishing Lemma for Steenrod squares.
In Section 5, we construct families of cycles using the bend-and-cancel construction,
proving all the upper bounds in Theorems 1 and 2. In Section 6, for context, we
discuss families of algebraic cycles.
The paper ends with three appendices. In Appendix 1 we give a more standard
deﬁnition of the space of ﬂat cycles. In Appendix 2, we describe the limited known
results for families of integral cycles.
In Appendix 3, we discuss the analogous
problem in Riemannian manifolds.
Notation: Unless otherwise indicated, all homology and cohomology groups have
coeﬃcient group Z2.
Acknowledgements.
I would like to thank Misha Gromov for suggesting this
problem to me. I believe that the problem ﬁrst appeared at the end of his essay
[6]. I would like to thank the referee for pointing out to me the paper [7]. Finally,
I would like to thank my thesis advisor Tom Mrowka for his help and support. I
started working on this material as a graduate student as a diﬀerent approach to


10
LARRY GUTH
my thesis problem on area-contracting maps. The connection to area-contracting
maps is discussed in Appendix 3.
1. The space of flat cycles
In this section, we set up our problem precisely. In particular, we deﬁne the
space of mod 2 ﬂat cycles Z(k, n) and the fundamental cohomology class a(k, n).
(Our deﬁnition is diﬀerent from the standard deﬁnition of the space of ﬂat cycles.
In Appendix 1, we recall the standard deﬁnition and prove that they agree.)
A mod 2 Lipschitz k-chain in the unit n-ball is a ﬁnite sum P aifi, where ai ∈Z2,
and fi is a Lipschitz map from the standard k-simplex to the closed unit n-ball. We
let IB(k, n) denote the space of mod 2 Lipschitz k-chains in the unit n-ball. We let
I∂B(k, n) denote the space of mod 2 Lipschitz k-chains in the boundary of the unit
ball. (Each map fi is a Lipschitz map from the k-simplex to ∂B.) Each of these
spaces is a vector space over Z2. We deﬁne the space of relative k-chains, Irel(k, n),
to be the quotient IB(k, n)/I∂B(k, n).
Next we deﬁne boundaries. The boundary of a Lipschitz k-chain is deﬁned in the
usual way from singular homology theory. It gives a boundary map ∂: IB(k, n) →
IB(k −1, n), and a boundary map ∂: I∂B(k, n) →I∂B(k −1, n). Hence we get a
boundary map between the quotients, Irel(k, n) →Irel(k −1, n). This map makes
the relative Lipschitz k-chains into a complex. The cycles in this complex are called
relative k-cycles. The set of relative k-cycles is denoted by Zrel(k, n). A relative
k-cycle can be represented by a k-chain whose boundary lies in ∂B. The homology
of the chain complex Irel is the relative homology of the unit n-ball: Hk(B, ∂B, Z2).
Next we deﬁne volume. For any k-chain C ∈IB(k, n), we deﬁne the volume of
C = P aifi to be P |ai| Vol (f ∗
i Euc). Here |ai| is equal to 1 if ai = 1 mod 2 and
zero otherwise; and f ∗
i (Euc) is the induced metric on the k-simplex. Because fi is
Lipschitz, this metric is well-deﬁned almost everywhere and belongs to L∞, which
is enough to deﬁne its volume. Now we deﬁne the volume of a relative k-chain
C ∈Irel(k, n) to be the inﬁmal volume of any absolute k-chain C′ ∈IB(k, n) whose
projection to Irel(k, n) is C.
We deﬁne a metric on Zrel(k, n) which measures how much area it takes to span
the diﬀerence of two cycles. If C1 and C2 are two relative cycles, we deﬁne the area-
distance between C1 and C2 to be the inﬁmal volume of any relative (k+1)-chain
D ∈Irel(k + 1, n) with ∂D = C1 −C2.
The following ﬁgure illustrates two 1-cycles that are close together in terms of
the area-distance.
Figure 4
The solid line and the dashed line each represent a relative 1-cycle in the unit disk.
The solid cycle has two components and the dashed cycle has only one component.
One component of the solid cycle lies far from the dashed cycle, so the two cycles


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
11
are far apart in the Hausdorﬀtopology. Nevertheless, the region between them,
consisting of a strip and a small ellipse, has small area, and so the cycles are close
together in the area-distance.
The area-distance from C1 to C2 can be zero. This happens if C1 and C2 are the
same geometric object parametrized in diﬀerent ways, or if C2 is obtained from C1
by adding a degenerate map fi which takes the k-simplex into a (k-1)-dimensional
surface.
We say that two relative cycles C1 and C2 are equivalent if the area-distance
between them is zero. The set of equivalence classes of relative cycles is a metric
space, where the metric is the area-distance. We deﬁne Z(k, n) to be the completion
of this metric space. We say that the volume of a cycle C ∈Z(k, n) is less than V
if there is a sequence of relative Lipschitz cycles Ci with Ci →C and the volume
of each Ci less than V . We sometimes denote the volume of C by |C|.
By a family F of k-cycles parametrized by a space X, we mean a continuous
map F : X →Z(k, n). In this paper, we will always assume that X is a simplicial
complex. We say that a family F detects a cohomology class α ∈H∗(Z(k, n)) if
F ∗(α) is non-zero in H∗(X). We let F(α) denote the set of all families of cycles
that detect α. We will say that a cycle C ∈Z(k, n) belongs to F if C = F(x) for
some x ∈X. If C belongs to F, we will write C ∈F. We deﬁne the maximal
volume of the family F to be supC∈F Volume (C).
Now we formally deﬁne the minimax volumes. Let α be a cohomology class in
H∗(Z(k, n)). We deﬁne V(α) by the following minimax formula.
V(α) =
inf
F ∈F(α) sup
C∈F
Volume (C).
Next we construct the fundamental cohomology class a(k, n) ∈Hn−k(Z(k, n), Z2).
The construction follows Almgren’s original construction in [1]. Informally, our task
is to deﬁne what it means for a family of relative k-cycles to sweep out the unit
ball. Morally, an i-dimensional family of k-cycles can be glued together to form a
(k+i)-cycle, but this is not literally true. We now give a construction that takes
an i-dimensional family of cycles and gives a (k+i)-cycle that, in some sense, is a
small perturbation of the family.
The basic object that we introduce to do the construction is called a complex of
cycles. A complex of cycles is a discrete approximation to a continuous family of
cycles. A complex of k-cycles is parametrized by a polyhedral complex X. For each
i-face A of X, the complex associates a (k+i)-dimensional mod 2 Lipschitz relative
chain C(A). These chains have to ﬁt together in the following sense. If ∂A = P Bi,
then ∂C(A) = P C(Bi). In particular, this formula implies that for each vertex v
of X, C(v) is a relative k-cycle.
We include a ﬁgure illustrating a complex of 1-cycles in the unit disk. In the
left half of the ﬁgure is the parameter space of our complex. It consists of three
0-simplices, p, q, and r, together with two 1-simplices, E and F. In the right half of
the ﬁgure, we see the corresponding cycles and chains. For each 0-simplex, there is
a corresponding 1-cycle in the unit disk. For each 1-simplex there is a corresponding
2-chain in the unit disk. The ﬁgure is supposed to show geometrically the way these
cycles and chains ﬁt together.


12
LARRY GUTH
p
q
E
F
r
C(p)
C(q)
C(r)
C(E)
C(F)
Figure 5
We can think of C algebraically as a chain map between two chain complexes.
The ﬁrst chain complex is associated to X. It has i-chains consisting of sums ciAi,
where ci ∈Z2 and Ai is an i-face of X. The second chain complex is the complex
of relative Lipschitz chains in the unit n-ball, Irel(k, n). A complex of k-cycles C
is a chain map from the ﬁrst chain complex to the second one with shift k. (We
remark that Irel(k, n) makes perfectly good sense for k > n.)
The chain map C induces a map from the simplicial homology of X to the
homology of Irel(k, n), which is the relative homology of the unit n-ball. Since the
chain map has shift k, we get a map from Hi(X) to Hk+i(B, ∂B). We call this map
the gluing homomorphism G.
There is a version of homotopy for complexes of cycles. If C is a complex of
cycles parametrized by X × [0, 1] (with the natural polyhedral structure), then we
call C a homotopy. If C restricted to X ×{0} is C0 and if C restricted to X ×{1} is
C1, then we say that C is a homotopy from C0 to C1. The gluing homomorphism
is homotopy invariant. From the algebraic point of view, C is a chain homotopy
between the chain maps C0 and C1.
Following Almgren, we next explain how to approximate a continuous family of
k-cycles by a discrete complex of cycles. The main tool in the construction is the
Federer-Fleming isoperimetric inequality.
Theorem. (Federer, Fleming) There is a constant C(n) so that the following holds.
Suppose that k < n, and that C is a mod 2 relative Lipschitz k-cycle in the unit
n-ball. Then C is the boundary of a (k+1)-chain D, with |D| < C(n)|C|
k+1
k .
In addition to the isoperimetric inequality, we also use the following basic facts.
If C is a mod 2 Lipschitz relative n-cycle in the unit n-ball, and if the volume of
C is less than the volume of the unit ball, then C bounds an (n+1)-chain D. Any
k-cycle of dimension greater than n automatically bounds a (k+1)-chain.
Let F be a family of k-cycles parametrized by X. We take a ﬁne triangulation
of X. We pick a small number δ > 0. For each vertex v of the triangulation, we
choose a mod 2 Lipschitz cycle C(v) so that the area-distance from C(v) to F(v)
is at most δ and so that the volume of C(v) is at most |F(v)| + δ.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
13
Now, since the triangulation is ﬁne, we may assume that if v1 and v2 are neigh-
boring vertices, then the area-distance between C(v1) and C(v2) is less than 3δ.
By deﬁnition, this means that there is a mod 2 relative Lipschitz (k + 1)-chain D
with boundary C1 −C2, and with |D| < 3δ.
Let E denote the edge from v1 to v2, so that ∂E = v1 −v2. We deﬁne C(E) = D.
We repeat this operation for every edge of the triangulation of X. For each edge E
with boundary v1 −v2, C(E) is a (k+1)-chain with boundary C(v1) −C(v2) and
volume at most 3δ.
We continue this procedure inductively. For each i-dimensional simplex ∆i in
X, we deﬁne a (k+i)-chain C(∆i) with the following properties. If the boundary
of the simplex ∆i is equal to P
j ∆i−1
j
, then the boundary of C(∆i) is equal to
P
j C(∆i−1
j
) in Irel(k, n). Moreover, C(∆i) has volume less than C(n)δ. If i ≤n−k,
we can choose such chains by using the isoperimetric inequality. Provided that δ is
suﬃciently small, we can also choose such a chain for i = n −k + 1, because the
boundary we are trying to ﬁll has n-volume less than C(n)δ. For i > n −k + 1, we
can automatically ﬁnd such a chain.
The complex of cycles C was not canonical. If δ > 0 is suﬃciently small, however,
the complex of cycles C is well-deﬁned up to homotopy. To see this, let C0 and
C1 be two possible choices of chain map following the construction above. Divide
X × [0, 1] into cells given by ∆× {0}, ∆× {1}, and ∆× [0, 1], where ∆varies over
the triangulation of X. Now deﬁne C(∆×{0}) = C0(∆) and C(∆×{1}) = C1(∆).
Suppose that ∆i is an i-simplex in X, and that the boundary of ∆i × [0, 1] is equal
to ∆i × {1} −∆i × {0} + P
j ∆i−1
j
× [0, 1]. We have to deﬁne C(∆i × [0, 1]) to be
a (k+i+1)-chain with boundary C(∆i × {1}) −C(∆i × {0}) + P
j C(∆i−1
j
× [0, 1]).
We proceed inductively, beginning with i = 0.
In this case, we have to ﬁnd a
(k+1)-chain spanning C(v, 1) −C(v, 0). But both C(v, 1) and C(v, 0) are within
δ of F(v), and so the area-distance between them is less than 2δ. Hence we can
choose a (k+1)-chain with the given boundary and with volume less than 2δ. If
i < n −k, we deﬁne these chains using the isoperimetric inequality. Provided that
δ is suﬃciently small, we can deﬁne the chains for i = n −k since we are trying to
ﬁll a boundary with n-volume less than C(n)δ. When i > n −k, we can deﬁne the
chains automatically.
A similar argument shows that if C0 is a complex of cycles chosen with respect
to a triangulation T0 of X, and if C1 is a complex of cycles chosen with respect to
a reﬁned triangulation T1, then the gluing maps of C0 and C1 agree.
The gluing map of the complex C is therefore deﬁned canonically. The gluing
map gives a homomorphism G : Hi(X) →Hk+i(B, ∂B).
In particular, taking
i = n−k, we get a homomorphism G : Hn−k(X) →Z2. The gluing homomorphism
makes precise the idea of a family of cycles “sweeping out” the unit ball: we say
that F sweeps out the unit ball if the corresponding gluing homomorphism G :
Hn−k →Z2 is non-trivial.
The gluing map gives a homomorphism from Hn−k(Z(k, n)) →Z2. Let z be
an (n-k)-cycle in Z(k, n).
We can think of z as a family of cycles, and then
consider G([z]) in Hn(B, ∂B) = Z2. If z′ is homologous to z, then let y be an
(n-k+1)-chain with boundary z −z′. The gluing map G extends to a map from
Hi(y) →Hk+i(B, ∂B) and so G([z]) = G([z′]). Hence G gives a homomorphism
from Hn−k(Z(k, n)) to Z2. By the universal coeﬃcient theorem, this homomor-
phism determines a cohomology class a(k, n) ∈Hn−k(Z(k, n)).


14
LARRY GUTH
For example, suppose that F is the family of parallel k-planes parametrized
by t ∈[−1, 1]n−k, with F(t) equal to the intersection of the unit n-ball with
the plane Rk × {t}. For each t in the boundary of [−1, 1]n−k, F(t) is equal to
the empty cycle in Z(k, n).
Therefore, we can think of F as a map of pairs
(In−k, ∂In−k) →(Z(k, n), ∗), where In−k denotes [−1, 1]n−k and ∗denotes the
empty cycle in Z(k, n). We can pick a ﬁne triangulation of [−1, 1]n−k and deﬁne
C(∆) to be Rk×∆intersected with the unit n-ball. The fundamental homology class
h of [−1, 1]n−k relative to its boundary is given by the sum of all top-dimensional
simplices of our triangulation. Following the deﬁnition, we see that G(h) is equal
to the fundamental homology class of (B, ∂B). Therefore, F ∗(a(k, n)) is equal to
the fundamental cohomology class of (In−k, ∂In−k).
2. Lower bounds based on the isoperimetric inequality
In this section we give a lower bound for V(a(k, n)). This result is due to Almgren
and later Gromov gave a simpler proof which we copy here. The lower bound for
V(a(k, n)) is the basis for all the other lower bounds in the paper. In fact, for
technical reasons, the later lower bounds are based on a slightly modiﬁed minimax
volume V+(a(k, n)) which we introduce below.
First we give Gromov’s elementary lower bound for V(a(k, n)). (Gromov’s argu-
ment appears on page 134 of [5].)
Proposition 2.1. (Gromov) The minimax volume V(a(k, n)) ≥c(n), for a dimen-
sional constant c(n) > 0.
Proof. Suppose that F : X →Z(k, n) is a family of k-cycles in the unit n-ball, and
that each cycle in F has volume less than ǫ, a small number that we will choose
later. We have to prove that F does not detect the class a(k, n). Equivalently, we
have to prove that the gluing homomorphism G : Hn−k(X) →Hn(B, ∂B) is zero.
The gluing homomorphism is induced by a complex of cycles C. We ﬁrst recall
the construction of C. We pick a ﬁne triangulation of X. For each vertex v of the
triangulation, we pick a Lipschitz cycle C(v) with distance at most δ from F(v) and
with volume at most ǫ+δ. Next for each edge E with boundary v1−v2, we choose a
(k+1)-chain C(E) with volume at most 3δ and with boundary C(v1)−C(v2). Here
δ is a number smaller than ǫ which we can make as small as we like by choosing a
suﬃciently ﬁne triangulation of X. Then we proceed to deﬁne C(∆i) with volume
at most C(n)δ for each i-simplex ∆i in our triangulation.
We will prove that our complex of cycles is homotopic to the zero complex. By
deﬁnition, that means that we will construct a complex of cycles ¯C deﬁned on the
product X × [0, 1], with ¯C(∆× {0}) = C(∆) and ¯C(∆× {1}) equal to the empty
cycle. Because of the homotopy, the gluing homomorphism associated to C is equal
to zero.
Now we do the construction. We have already deﬁned ¯C on each face of the form
∆× {0} and ∆× {1}, so it remains to deﬁne our complex ¯C on faces of the form
∆× (0, 1). We do this inductively, beginning with 1-faces of the form v × (0, 1),
where v is a vertex in our triangulation of X.
Using the isoperimetric inequality, each cycle C(v) can be ﬁlled by a (k+1)-chain
of volume less than C(n)ǫ. For each vertex v of the triangulation, we deﬁne ¯C(v ×
(0, 1)) to be such a ﬁlling. We have ∂¯C(v × (0, 1)) = C(v) = ¯C(v × {0}) −¯C(v × 1),
so this choice obeys the boundary equation for complexes of cycles.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
15
Now we inductively deﬁne ¯C(∆i ×(0, 1)) for i ≥1, so that it has volume at most
C(n)ǫ. By induction, we can assume that we have already deﬁned ¯C on all lower-
dimensional skeleta. In particular, we have already deﬁned ¯C on the boundary of
our cell ¯C(∆i × (0, 1)). The boundary is associated to a (k + i)-dimensional cycle
of total volume at most C(n)ǫ. Now by the isoperimetric inequality, we can ﬁnd a
ﬁlling of this cycle with total volume at most C(n)ǫ, and we deﬁne ¯C(∆i × (0, 1))
to be this ﬁlling. The special case that i = n −k deserves a further remark. In
this case, the boundary of ∆i × (0, 1) is associated to an n-cycle in the unit n-ball
of total volume at most C(n)ǫ. Because ǫ is suﬃciently small, this n-cycle must
have degree 0. Because it has degree zero, it admits a ﬁlling. The ﬁlling is an
(n+1)-chain, which automatically has zero volume.
□
The key step in the proof above was to ﬁnd a chain ¯C(v × (0, 1)) with boundary
C(v) and with (k+1)-volume at most C(n)ǫ. Therefore, our proof shows that a
family of cycles detecting a(k, n) must contain a cycle of large ﬁlling volume. We
recall that the ﬁlling volume of a Lipschitz k-cycle C is the smallest (k+1)-volume
of any relative chain D with ∂D = C. The ﬁlling volume is clearly continuous in
the area-distance, and so it deﬁnes a continuous function on Z(k, n).
Proposition 2.2. Let F be a family of cycles that detects a(k, n). Then F contains
a cycle with ﬁlling volume at least c(n).
Proof. The proof is essentially the same. We proceed by contradiction, assuming
that each F(v) has ﬁlling volume at most ǫ. Then each C(v) has ﬁlling volume at
most ǫ + δ. Then we can construct ¯C(v × (0, 1)) with volume at most ǫ + δ. The
rest of the proof goes as above.
□
For technical reasons, we now introduce a minor variant of the minimax volume
V(α). We say that V+(α) is at least V if, for any family of cycles F : X →Z(k, n),
if we let S ⊂X denote the subset of cycles with volume at most V , then F ∗(α)
vanishes on an open neighborhood of S.
The diﬀerence between V and V+ is as follows. If V < V(α), and if S ⊂X
denotes the subset of cycles with volume at most V , then F ∗(α) vanishes on S, but
it’s not obvious whether it vanishes on a neighborhood of S. The set S is compact.
If it happens to have a neighborhood that retracts onto it, then F ∗(α) vanishes on
that neighborhood, but the set S may be a very nasty compact set. We will need to
use open sets later in the paper because we use theorems from algebraic topology
that hold for open covers but which don’t hold for covers by arbitrary compact sets.
It follows from the deﬁnition that V+(α) ≤V(α). We will prove lower bounds
for V+(α), and these bounds immediately imply lower bounds for V(α). Gromov’s
method also gives a lower bound for V+(a(k, n)).
Proposition 2.3. (Gromov) The minimax volume V+(a(k, n)) ≥c(n), for a di-
mensional constant c(n) > 0.
Proof. Let F : X →Z(k, n) be a family of k-cycles. Let S ⊂X be the subset of
cycles with volume at most V . If V is suﬃciently small, we need to prove that
F ∗(a(k, n)) vanishes on a neighborhood of S.
Even though every cycle in S has volume at most V , we have no way to bound
the volumes of cycles in any neighborhood of S, because the volume function is not
continuous. The situation improves by looking at the ﬁlling volume. Because of the
Federer-Fleming isoperimetric inequality, every cycle in S has ﬁlling volume at most


16
LARRY GUTH
C(n)V
k+1
k . But the ﬁlling volume is a continuous function on Z(k, n). Therefore,
we can choose a neighborhood of S in which every cycle has ﬁlling volume at most
2C(n)V
k+1
k . Now if V is suﬃciently small, then we can apply Proposition 2.2 to
conclude that F ∗(a(k, n)) vanishes on this neighborhood.
□
To ﬁnish this section, we make some historical and expository remarks about
the lower bound for V(a(k, n)). This material is not needed in the proofs of the
theorems.
The minimax volume V(a(n−1, n)) can be bounded below using the isoperimetric
inequality. If we have a 1-parameter family of hypersurfaces sweeping out the unit
n-ball, then one of these surfaces must divide the ball in half by volume. (This
remains true even if the surfaces are not embedded.) In other words, we can choose
a surface C in our family so that B −C = U1 ∪U2, where Ui is a union of connected
components of B−C, and |U1| = |U2| = (1/2)|B|. We can then divide the boundary
of B into two pieces ∂B1, ∂B2, according to which open set they border.
We
reorder the sets so that |∂B1| ≤(1/2)|∂B|. Now the boundary of U1 is contained in
∂B1 ∪C, and so it has total volume at most (1/2)|∂B| + |C|. By the isoperimetric
inequality, (1/2)
n−1
n |B|
n−1
n
= |U1|
n−1
n
≤C(n)|∂U1| ≤C(n)[(1/2)|∂B|+|C|]. In the
isoperimetric inequality, the sharp constant is given by B, so C(n)|∂B| = |B|
n−1
n .
Rearranging we get the following inequality.
|C| ≥[(1/2)
n−1
n
−(1/2)]|∂B|.
This approach can be made sharp by using the sharp isoperimetric inequality for
relative cycles in the unit n-ball.
To my knowledge, the ﬁrst person to consider the analogous problem with k <
n −1 was Almgren. In [2], he proved the following sharp theorem for families of
cycles sweeping out the n-sphere.
Theorem. (Almgren) Let F be a family of k-cycles sweeping out the unit n-sphere.
Then the maximal volume of F is at least the volume of the unit k-sphere.
Taking a bilipschitz embedding of the unit n-ball into the unit n-sphere, Alm-
gren’s theorem implies a non-sharp lower bound for V(a(k, n)). Almgren’s lower
bound is still better than the one in Proposition 2.1. Since the bilipschitz constant
of the embedding can be taken independent of n it follows that V(a(k, n)) ≥c(k),
independent of n.
Almgren’s proof involves the theory of varifolds, which he invented more or
less for this purpose. Unfortunately, the proof was never published, but similar
arguments appear in Pitts’s book [17]. We might expect to get better estimates
for V(a(k, n)) by applying Almgren’s method instead of by applying his theorem
about spheres.
In [5] (page 135), Gromov mentions that Almgren’s techniques
imply V(a(k, n)) = ωk.
Recently, in [7], Gromov gave a sharp estimate for the k-dimensional waist of
the unit n-sphere. This result is similar to Almgren’s theorem, but the technical
details of the statement are diﬀerent. The paper uses topological methods instead
of minimal surfaces.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
17
3. Lower bounds based on Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory
We now estimate the minimax volume of the cohomology class a(k, n)p, proving
the lower bounds from Theorem 1. The results in this section are due to Gromov,
and they appeared (with diﬀerent notation) in Section 8 of [7].
Theorem 1. (Lower bounds) The minimax volume V(a(k, n)p) is greater than
c(n)p
n−k
n .
Proof. The proof is based on Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory.
Let B1, ..., Bp be
disjoint balls inside the unit ball, each with radius r = (1/4)p−1/n. (It is not hard
to ﬁnd disjoint balls with this radius. A detailed argument is given in the proof of
the cup product theorem below.)
Let F : X →Z(k, n) be a family of k-cycles that detects a(k, n)p. Let S(i) ⊂X
be the subset of cycles x ∈X so that F(x)∩Bi has volume at most (1/2)V+(a(k, n))rk.
By the deﬁnition of V+(a(k, n)) and a scaling argument, F ∗(a(k, n)) vanishes on
an open neighborhood of S(i). By Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory, the cohomology
class F ∗(a(k, n))p vanishes on a neighborhood of ∪p
i=1S(i). (For a proof, see pages
2-3 of [4].) Since F detects a(k, n)p, there must be a cycle C in F that does not lie
in S(i) for any i.
By the deﬁnition of S(i), the intersection C ∩Bi has volume greater than
(1/2)V+(a(k, n))rk. Since the balls Bi are disjoint, the cycle C has total volume
greater than (1/2)pV+(a(k, n))rk.
According to Proposition 2.3, V+(a(k, n)) ≥
c(n), and r was deﬁned to be (1/4)p−1/n. Plugging in, we see that the volume of
C is at least c(n)p
n−k
n .
□
The proof of Theorem 1 allows us to estimate the minimax volume V+(α) for a
cup product α = α1 ∪... ∪αp in terms of the minimax volumes V+(αi).
Cup Product Theorem. Suppose that α = α1 ∪... ∪αP is a cohomology class in
H∗(Z(k, n)). Then the minimax volume of α obeys the following inequality.
V+(α) ≥4−k[
P
X
i=1
V+(αi)
n
n−k ]
n−k
n .
Proof. Suppose that B1, ...BP are disjoint balls inside the unit ball, with radii r1,
..., rP . We will choose particular balls later.
Let F : X →Z(k, n) be a family of k-cycles. Let ǫ > 0 be any small number. Let
S ⊂X be the subset of cycles with volume at most V = (1−ǫ)4−k[PP
i=1 V+(αi)
n
n−k ]
n−k
n .
We have to prove that F ∗(α) vanishes on a neighborhood of S.
We deﬁne S(i) ⊂X to be the subset of cycles x ∈X so that F(x)∩Bi has volume
at most (1 −ǫ)rk
i V+(αi). By scaling and the deﬁniton of V+, it follows that F ∗(αi)
vanishes on a neighborhood of S(i). By Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory, the class
F ∗(α) vanishes on a neighborhood of ∪P
i=1S(i). Since the balls Bi are disjoint, it
follows that this union contains every cycle of volume at most PP
i=1(1−ǫ)rk
i V+(αi).
In order to ﬁnish the proof, we have to choose disjoint balls Bi so that V =
P(1 −ǫ)rk
i V+(αi). We claim that we can ﬁnd disjoint balls in the unit ball with
radii ri provided that PP
i=1 rn
i ≤4−n.
To ﬁnd the disjoint balls, we order the
radii so that r1 ≥... ≥rP . Then we choose a point p1 inside the ball of radius
1/2 around the origin. Since P rn
i ≤4−n, r1 ≤1/4, and so the ball B(p1, r1) is
contained in the unit ball. Now we proceed inductively. We suppose that we have


18
LARRY GUTH
chosen p1, ..., pj−1 in B(0, 1/2) so that the balls B(pi, ri) are disjoint. If ωn denotes
the volume of the unit n-ball, then the volume of B(0, 1/2) is 2−nωn. On the other
hand, the volume of ∪j−1
i=1 B(pi, 2ri) is Pj−1
i=1 (2ri)nωn < 2−nωn. Therefore, we can
choose a point pj in B(0, 1/2) but not in the union ∪j−1
i=1 B(pi, 2ri). Since rj ≤ri
for i < j, the ball B(pj, rj) is disjoint from ∪j−1
i=1 B(pi, ri). Continuing to choose
balls in this way proves the claim.
Finally, we choose ri subject to P rn
i
≤4−n in order to maximize P(1 −
ǫ)rk
i V+(αi).
The maximum value is V = (1 −ǫ)4−k[P
i V+(αi)
n
n−k ]
n−k
n .
It is
obtained by using the following values of ri:
ri = (1/4)V+(αi)
1
n−k [
P
X
i=1
V+(αi)
n
n−k ]−1/n.
□
Remark: The cup product theorem holds for cohomology with any coeﬃcients
- i.e. if we consider cohomology classes in H∗(Z(k, n), A) for any coeﬃcient group
A. It also holds if we replace Z(k, n) by the space of integral Lipschitz cycles. For
more comments on integral cycles, see Appendix 2.
4. Lower bounds based on Steenrod squares
In this section, we prove the lower bounds in Theorem 2. These lower bounds
involve Steenrod squares. For background on Steenrod squares, consult [11]. We
use one piece of notation which is not in [11]. We deﬁne Sqi : Hp →H2p−i to be
Sqp−i. We deﬁne Sq2
i α to be Sqi[Sqiα]. In a similar way, we inductively deﬁne
cohomology classes of the form SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 α.
The topological input to the proof is a vanishing lemma for Steenrod squares.
This lemma will generalize the fact that if V1, V2 are open sets with α|V1 = 0 and
α|V2 = 0, then the cup square α2 vanishes on V1 ∪V2.
In order to state our lemma, we set up some vocabulary. Let X be a simplicial
complex. Let π : Si × X →X denote the projection onto the second factor. Let V
be a subset of Si × X. We let V (θ) denote the set {x ∈X|(θ, x) ∈V }. The main
deﬁnition that we need to state our vanishing lemma is the following.
P[V ] := ∩θ∈Si[V (θ) ∪V (−θ)].
We say a few words to describe P[V ]. First of all, P[V ] is a subset of X. For each
x ∈X, we examine the intesection of V with Si×{x}. Roughly, we include x in P[V ]
if this intersection is suﬃciently large. Let V (x) denote the set {θ ∈Si|(θ, x) ∈V }.
We include x in P[V ] if, for each θ, either θ or −θ belongs to V (x). In other words,
we map V (x) to RPi using the standard covering Si →RPi, and we include x in
P[V ] if the map is surjective.
Vanishing Lemma. Suppose V is an open subset of Si × X, and that α is a
cohomology class in H∗(X). If π∗α vanishes on V , then Sqiα vanishes on P[V ].
Incidentally, P[V ] is open.
Proof. The main part of the proof concerns Steenrod squares and the construction
of a homotopy.
The ﬁnal result also requires a little point-set topology, which
we put at the end. Therefore, we begin by proving a slightly weaker statement.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
19
Suppose that K is any compact subset of V . We will ﬁrst prove that Sqiα vanishes
on a neighborhood of P[K].
We begin by recalling a construction of Steenrod squares given in [11] on pages
502-504.
We can assume that X is connected. Let x0 be a basepoint of X. Let X ∧X
denote the smash product of X with itself. The group Z2 acts on Si × X ∧X by
sending (θ, x1, x2) to (−θ, x2, x1). We call the quotient space ΓiX.
By abuse of notation, we use x0 to denote the basepoint of X ∧X as well as
the basepoint of X. The action of Z2 on Si × X ∧X sends (θ, x0) to (−θ, x0).
Therefore, the image of Si × {x0} in the quotient ΓiX is a copy of RPi. We let
ΛiX denote the quotient of ΓiX obtained by collapsing this RPi to a point.
Let ∆0 : Si × X →Si × X ∧X be the diagonal map ∆0(θ, x) = (θ, x, x). There
is an action of Z2 on each of these spaces. The action on Si × X sends (θ, x) to
(−θ, x). The action on Si × X ∧X is the one we mentioned above, which sends
(θ, x1, x2) to (−θ, x2, x1). The map ∆0 is equivariant with respect to this action,
and so it descends to a map between the quotients. If we then collapse ΓiX to
ΛiX, we get a map ∆: RPi × X →ΛiX.
Let p be the dimension of the cohomology class α. Then the cohomology class α
can be represented by a map f from X to the Eilenberg-Maclane space K(Z2, p).
We abbreviate this space as K(p). The construction of ΛiX is functorial, so we
get a map Λif : ΛiX →ΛiK(p). The deﬁnition of Steenrod squares uses a certain
cohomology class λ ∈H2p(ΛiK(p)). The class λ is deﬁned in [11], page 504.
The Steenrod squares of α can now be deﬁned in terms of λ, Λif, and ∆. Recall
that by the Kunneth theorem, H∗(RPi×X) is the tensor product H∗(RPi)⊗H∗(X).
Let ω be the generator of H1(RPi). Then the following formula can be taken as a
deﬁnition of Steenrod squares.
∆∗(Λif ∗λ) =
i
X
j=0
ωj ⊗Sqjα.
To prove our vanishing theorem, we will construct a homotopy of Λif ◦∆which
maps a neighborhood of RPi × P[K] to the basepoint of ΛiK(p). From this homo-
topy, it follows that Pi
j=0 ωj ⊗Sqjα vanishes on a nieghborhood of RP i × P[K].
The Kunneth theorem then implies that Sqiα vanishes on a neighborhood of P[K].
Recall that π : Si × X →X is the projection onto the second factor.
The
map f ◦π from Si × X to K(p) induces the cohomology class π∗α.
We know
by hypothesis that π∗α vanishes on an open set V containing the compact set
K ⊂Si × X. Therefore, the map f ◦π, restricted to V , is null-homotopic. By
the homotopy extension theorem, we can homotope f ◦π to a map that sends a
smaller neighborhood U ⊃K to the basepoint of K(p). More formally, we have a
continuous family Ft : Si × X →K(p) where F0(θ, x) = f(x) and where F1 maps
U to the basepoint of K(p).
Using this homotopy of f, we now construct a homotopy of Λif ◦∆. We deﬁne
a family of maps Gt from Si × X to Si × K(p) ∧K(p) by the following formula.
Gt(θ, x) = (θ, Ft(θ, x), Ft(−θ, x)).
The maps Gt are equivariant with respect to the Z2 actions deﬁned above. At
time 0, we have G0(θ, x) = (θ, f(x), f(x)). Let ∗denote the basepoint of K(p) ∧


20
LARRY GUTH
K(p). At time 1, we have G1(θ, x) ∈Si × {∗} if either (θ, x) or (−θ, x) is in U.
Because Gt is equivariant, it descends to a family of maps from RPi ×X to ΓiK(p).
Composing with the quotient map from ΓiK(p) to ΛiK(p), we get a family of maps
Ht from RPi × X to ΛiK(p). The map H0 is equal to Λif ◦∆. The map H1 sends
a point (±θ, x) ∈RPi × X to the basepoint of ΛiK(p) if either (θ, x) or (−θ, x) lies
in U. In particular, H1 maps RPi × P[U] to the basepoint of ΛiK(p).
We know that U is an open neighborhood of K. Since K is compact, it follows
that U contains the ǫ-neighborhood of K for some ǫ > 0. Therefore, U(θ) contains
the ǫ neighborhood of K(θ) for every θ.
Hence U(θ) ∪U(−θ) contains the ǫ-
neighborhood of K(θ)∪K(−θ). We conclude that P[U] contains the ǫ-neighborhood
of P[K]. In particular, the map H1 sends a neighborhood of RPi × P[K] to the
basepoint of ΛiK(p). We conclude that Sqiα vanishes on a neighborhood of P[K].
Now let K1 ⊂K2 ⊂... be an exhaustion of V by compact sets. Let Vj be an open
neighborhood of Kj contained in Kj+1. Clearly P[K1] ⊂P[K2] ⊂... We will check
that the union of P[Kj] is equal to P[V ]. Suppose that x ∈P[V ]. Let τ : Si →RPi
denote the standard covering, and recall that V (x) = {θ ∈Si|(θ, x) ∈V }. Since
x ∈P[V ], τ(V (x)) = RPi. Since V is equal to the union of Vj, V (x) is equal to
the union of the open sets Vj(x). Hence τ(Vj(x)) is an open covering of RPi by
inﬁnitely many sets. Since RPi is compact, there is a ﬁnite subcovering, and we
conclude that one of the sets τ(Vj(x)) covers RPi. In other words, x lies in P[Vj],
which lies in P[Kj+1]. Therefore P[V ] = ∪P[Kj] and so Sqiα vanishes on P[V ].
Incidentally, the argument above implies that P[V ] is open. Suppose that x lies
in P[V ]. By the last paragraph, we know that τ(Kj(x)) is equal to RPi if j is big
enough. Let Br(x) denote the ball around x in X of radius r. Since Kj is a compact
subset of V , the set Kj(x) × Br(x) ⊂V for a small positive r > 0. It follows that
Br(x) is contained in P[V ]. Hence P[V ] is open.
□
Using this vanishing lemma in place of the Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory, we
will prove lower bounds for V+(β) for cohomology classes β ∈H∗(Z(k, n)) deﬁned
using Steenrod squares.
Steenrod Tower Theorem. For each ǫ > 0, there is a constant c(n, ǫ) > 0 that
makes the following estimate hold. If α ∈H∗(Z(k, n)) is a cohomology class, i is
an integer in the range 0 ≤i ≤n −k −1, and P > 0 is an integer, then V+(SqP
i α)
obeys the lower bound below.
V+(SqP
i α) ≥c(n, ǫ)(2 −ǫ)
n−i−k
n−i
P V+(α).
I believe that this theorem should also hold with ǫ = 0, but I don’t know how
to prove it. When i = 0, the theorem follows immediately from the cup product
theorem. We have V+(SqP
0 α) = V+(α2P ). By the cup product theorem, V+(α2P ) ≥
c(n)[2P ]
n−k
n V+(α) = c(n)2
n−k
n
P V+(α). So we see that when i = 0, the theorem
holds even when ǫ = 0.
Given the Steenrod tower theorem, we can quickly prove the lower bounds in
Theorem 2.
Theorem 2. (Lower bounds) For each ǫ > 0, there is a constant c(n, ǫ) > 0 so
that the following estimate holds.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
21
c(n, ǫ)
n−k−1
Y
i=0
(2 −ǫ)
n−k−i
n−i
Qi ≤V(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)).
Proof. By the deﬁnition of V+, we know the following inequality.
V(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)) ≥V+(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)).
As described above, we apply the cup product theorem to deal with the Sq0
term.
V+(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)) ≥c(n)[2Q0]
n−k
n V+(SqQ1
1 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)).
Now we apply the Steenrod tower theorem n−k −1 times to deal with the other
Steenrod squares.
≥c(n, ǫ)2
n−k
n
Q0 Qn−k−1
i=1
(2 −ǫ)
n−i−k
n−i
QiV+(a(k, n)).
Finally, we use Proposition 2.3 to bound V+(a(k, n)) ≥c(n).
≥c(n, ǫ)2
n−k
n
Q0 Qn−k−1
i=1
(2 −ǫ)
n−i−k
n−i
Qi.
This inequality is slightly stronger than the one we had to prove.
□
Now we take up the proof of the Steenrod Tower Theorem.
Proof. Throughout the proof, we ﬁx i, k, and n. The case i = 0 was proven above,
so we assume i ≥1.
The main idea of the proof is to inductively use the vanishing lemma from the
beginning of this section. In the proof of the cup product theorem, in order to
lower bound V+(αp), we cut the unit ball into p disjoint pieces. To adapt that
argument to Steenrod squares, we again need to cut the ball into pieces. But this
time, instead of cutting the ball into pieces in one way, we need a high-dimensional
family of diﬀerent ways of cutting the ball into pieces. We formalize this idea as a
“pyramid of subsets of the unit ball”.
We let O be the set of open sets in Rn equipped with the Hausdorﬀtopology.
An i-pyramid of open sets of height P consists of the following data. For each
integer 0 ≤p ≤P, we have a map Up from (Si)P −p to O. (By convention, the
space (Si)0 is a single point.) The maps Up must obey two rules.
Rule 1. Up(θ1, ..., θP −p) ⊂Up+1(θ1, ..., θP −p−1).
Rule 2. Up(θ1, ..., θP −p−1, θP −p) and Up(θ1, ..., θP −p−1, −θP −p) are disjoint.
We call UP the top level of the i-pyramid. It consists of one large open set,
UP (∗), where ∗denotes the one point in the space (Si)0. We say that U is an
i-pyramid of open sets in the unit ball if UP (∗) is contained in the unit ball. We
call the family of sets U0 the bottom level of the pyramid.
Rule 1 describes how the various levels of an i-pyramid are related to each other.
Roughly it says that the open sets in the top levels are the largest and that the open
sets in the bottom levels are the smallest. Rule 2 forces various open sets in an i-
pyramid to be disjoint. For example, it implies that the 2P subsets U0(±θ1, ..., ±θP )
are disjoint. In Figure 6, we illustrate some of the sets in an i-pyramid of open sets
with height P = 2.


22
LARRY GUTH
Figure 6
The largest circle is U2(∗), the unit ball in R2. The medium-sized ellipse on the
left is U1(θ) and the medium ellipse on the right is U1(−θ), for some point θ ∈Si.
The two small thin ellipses on the left are U0(θ, ±φ) for some point φ ∈Si. The
two small round ellipses on the right are U0(−θ, ±ψ) for some point ψ ∈Si.
Let U be an i-pyramid of open sets in the unit ball. We are going to deﬁne
a measure of the thickness of various sets in U. If A is any open set, we deﬁne
Rad[A] to be the largest radius R of any ball B(x, R) ⊂A. For any θ ∈(Si)P ,
we deﬁne T0(θ) = (1/2)Rad[U0(θ)]k. Notice that T0 depends on the value of k.
Roughly speaking, T0 is measuring the k-dimensional thickness of the set U0(θ).
Our function T0 is deﬁned on the bottom layer of the pyramid. We inductively
deﬁne thickness functions on higher layers of the pyramid, Tp : (Si)P −p →R, by
the following formula.
Tp(θ1, ..., θP −p) = inf
φ∈Si Tp−1(θ1, ..., θP −p, φ) + Tp−1(θ1, ..., θP −p, −φ).
Following the induction, we ultimately deﬁne a function TP : (Si)0 →R. The
space (Si)0 consists of a single point ∗, and so TP has a single value TP(∗), which
we abbreviate as T . We call T the k-thickness of the i-pyramid U.
We can control minimax volumes of Steenrod squares in terms of the thickness
of pyramids according to the following lemma. This lemma makes up the ﬁrst half
of the proof of the Steenrod Tower Theorem.
Main Lemma 1. As above, we ﬁx n and 1 ≤k ≤n −1 and i in the range
1 ≤i ≤n−k −1. Suppose that there is an i-pyramid U of open sets in the unit ball
with height P and k-thickness T . Suppose further that every set U0(θ) is convex.
Then for every class α ∈H∗(Z(k, n)), the following inequality holds.
V+(SqP
i α) ≥T V+(α).


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
23
Proof. We will make an inductive argument using the Vanishing Lemma from the
beginning of this section.
The base for our induction is given by the following
lemma.
Lemma 4.1. Let F : X →Z(k, n) be a family of cycles. We deﬁne a subset of
small cycles S0 ⊂(Si)P × X, by saying that (θ, x) ∈S0 if the restriction of F(x) to
U0(θ) has volume at most T0(θ)V+(α). Let π0 be the projection from (Si)P × X to
the second factor. Then π∗
0(F ∗α) vanishes on a neighborhood of S0.
Proof. We can ﬁnd a ball B(θ) ⊂U0(θ) with radius Rad[U0(θ)]. We would like
these balls to vary continuously with θ. Because the sets U0(θ) are convex, we can
arrange this for slightly smaller balls. If δ > 0, we can ﬁnd a continuous family of
balls B(θ) ⊂U0(θ), where B(θ) has radius at least (1 −δ)Rad[U0(θ)]. We pick a
ﬁne triangulation of (Si)P . For each vertex of the triangulation, we choose a center
c(v) ⊂U0(v), so that the ball of radius Rad[U0(v)] around c(v) is contained in
U0(v). Now we extend c to a piecewise-linear function on (Si)P . For a suﬃciently
ﬁne triangulation, we claim that the ball around c(θ) of radius (1−δ)Rad[U0(θ)] lies
in U0(θ) for every θ. This last step uses the convexity of U0(θ). The point θ lies in
some simplex of our triangulation with vertices v1, ..., vN. Since the triangulation
is ﬁne, we can assume that U0(θ) is close to U0(vi) in the Hausdorﬀtopology, and
so the ball around c(vi) of radius (1 −δ)Rad[U0(θ)] lies in U0(θ). Now, the set of
all points c so that the ball of radius (1−δ)Rad[U0(θ)] lies in U0(θ) is a convex set.
Since c(θ) is a convex combination of c(vi), it follows that the ball around c(θ) of
radius (1 −δ)Rad[U0(θ)] lies in U0(θ).
We now deﬁne a map F0 from (Si)P ×X to Z(k, n). The cycle F(θ, x) is deﬁned
by taking the cycle F(x), restricting it to the ball B(θ), and then rescaling the ball
to get a cycle in the unit ball. If (θ, x) ∈S0, then the rescaled cycle has volume
at most (1 −δ)−k(1/2)V+(α) < V+(α). By the deﬁnition of V+, the cohomology
class F ∗
0 α vanishes on a neighborhood of S0.
Finally, we check that F0 is homotopic to F ◦π0. We construct a homotopy of
our family of balls B(θ, t) so that B(θ, 0) = B(θ), B(θ, 1) is the unit ball, and each
ball B(θ, t) is contained in the unit ball. To construct the family, we ﬁrst move
all the centers c(θ) to the center of the unit ball, and then we rescale the balls so
that all the radii are 1. Now we deﬁne Ft(θ, x) by taking the cycle F(x), restricting
to the ball B(θ, t), and rescaling to get a cycle in Z(k, n).
At t = 1, we have
Ft = F ◦π0, since the restriction and rescaling are both the identity. Therefore,
Ft gives a homotopy from F0 to F ◦π0. We conclude that π∗
0[F ∗α] vanishes on a
neighborhood of S0.
□
Now we turn to the inductive step in the proof. We consider the spaces SP −p×X
for p from 0 to P. Inside each space, we deﬁne a subset of ”small cycles” Sp ⊂
SP −p × X. We say that (θ, x) ∈Sp if the intersection of F(x) with Up(θ) has
volume at most Tp(θ)V+(α). Let πp : (Si)P −p ×X →X denote the projection onto
the second factor. We will show inductively that the cohomology class π∗
p(F ∗Sqp
i α)
vanishes on a neighborhood of Sp. Lemma 4.1 proves the base case p = 0.
We have to set up the problem in such a way that we can apply the Vanishing
Lemma. By induction, we assume that π∗
p−1(F ∗Sqp−1
i
α) vanishes on a neighbor-
hood of Sp−1.
We let Y = (Si)P −p × X so that Si × Y = (Si)P −(p−1) × X.
We let π : Si × Y →Y denote the projection onto the second factor.
We let
β = π∗
p(F ∗Sqp−1
i
α), a cohomology class in H∗(Y ). Our inductive hypothesis tells


24
LARRY GUTH
us that π∗β vanishes on a neighborhood of Sp−1 ⊂Si × Y . The Vanishing Lemma
then implies that Sqiβ vanishes on a neighborhood of P[Sp−1]. Plugging in the
deﬁnition of β, we see that Sqiβ = π∗
p(F ∗Sqp
i α). To complete the induction, we
only have to show that Sp is contained in P[Sp−1].
Suppose that (θ, x) is contained in Sp, where θ = (θ1, ..., θP −p). By deﬁnition,
the volume of F(x) ∩Up(θ) is at most Tp(θ)V+(α). Now let φ be any point in
Si. By the deﬁnition of an i-pyramid of convex sets, we know that Up−1(θ, φ) and
Up−1(θ, −φ) are disjoint subsets of Up(θ). Therefore, we get the following formula.
|F(x) ∩Up−1(θ, φ)| + |F(x) ∩Up−1(θ, −φ)| ≤Tp(θ)V+(α).
But by the deﬁnition of the thickness function Tp, we know that Tp(θ) ≤
Tp−1(θ, φ) + Tp−1(θ, −φ).
|F(x) ∩Up−1(θ, φ)| + |F(x) ∩Up−1(θ, −φ)| ≤[Tp−1(θ, φ) + Tp−1(θ, −φ)]V+(α).
We see that either |F(x)∩Up−1(θ, φ)| ≤Tp−1(θ, φ)V+(α) or |F(x)∩Up−1(θ, −φ)| ≤
Tp−1(θ, −φ)V+(α). In other words, either (θ, φ, x) is in Sp−1 or else (θ, −φ, x) is in
Sp−1. Since this analysis applies to every φ ∈Si, we conclude that Sp is contained
in P[Sp−1]. This argument proves the inductive step.
We conclude that π∗
P (F ∗SqP
i α) vanishes on a neighborhood of SP ⊂(Si)P −P ×
X. But the space (Si)P −P ×X is just X, and the projection πP is just the identity.
In other words, F ∗SqP
i α vanishes on a neighborhood of SP . The set SP is just the
subset of X where F(x) has volume at most T V+(α). Since this analysis applies
to any family F, we conclude that V+(SqP
i α) ≥T V+(α).
□
In order to use Main Lemma 1, we need to construct an i-pyramid of open sets
with height P and estimate its k-thickness. Ideally we would like to know the largest
possible k-thickness for an i-pyramid of open sets of height P (where the bottom
layer consists of convex sets). This problem is a kind of max-min problem, because
for each i-pyramid the k-thickness is deﬁned by taking a sequence of inﬁma, and
we are then looking for the supremum over all the pyramids. The best estimate I
know how to prove is contained in the following lemma.
Main Lemma 2. As above, we ﬁx a dimension n, and 1 ≤k ≤n −1, and
1 ≤i ≤n −k −1. For every P we will construct an i-pyramid of open sets in
the unit n-ball of height P. Each open set in each pyramid will be convex. For any
ǫ > 0, there is a constant c(n, ǫ) > 0 so that for every P, the pyramid of height P
has k-thickness at least c(n, ǫ)(2 −ǫ)
n−i−k
n−i
P .
The Steenrod tower theorem follows immediately by combining the two main
lemmas. I believe that this lemma should also hold with ǫ = 0, but I don’t know
how to prove it.
If this lemma did hold with ǫ = 0, then the Steenrod tower
theorem and Theorem 2 would also hold with ǫ = 0, determining V(SqQa(k, n)) up
to a dimensional constant C(n). The lemma cannot hold if we replace (2 −ǫ) by
(2 + ǫ) because the lower bound in Theorem 2 would then become larger than the
upper bound.
Proof. First we will construct an i-pyramid of open sets. Then we will estimate its
k-thickness.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
25
We are going to talk about some sequences of unit vectors. First ﬁx v1−n, ..., v−1, v0
a basis of orthonormal vectors. Then, for ﬁxed p, consider all sequences v1, ..., vP −p
of unit vectors with the property that va is perpendicular to the previous (n-i-1)
vectors: va−1, ..., va−n+i+1. In other words, any string of (n-i) consecutive vectors
in the list is orthonormal. This condition holds even if a −n + i + 1 < 1, which is
why we ﬁxed v1−n, ..., v0. Call the set of such sequences of vectors O(p). (We deﬁne
O(P) to be a point.) Now there is a map O(p −1) →O(p) given by forgetting
the last vector. The ﬁbers of this map are each i-spheres, and the map is a ﬁber
bundle.
Lemma 4.2. Each of the bundles O(p −1) →O(p) is trivial.
Proof. We work by induction. Clearly the map O(P −1) →O(P) is trivial, as the
base is a point. We suppose that O(p) →O(p + 1) is trival. To do the induction,
we need to show that the bundle O(p −1) →O(p) is trivial.
We accomplish
this by showing that O(p −1) is the pullback of the bundle O(p) by the map
O(p) →O(p + 1).
That sentence is a bit confusing, so we illustrate it with a
diagram. Let π denote the map O(p) →O(p + 1).
π∗(O(p)) −−−−→
O(p)
y
yπ
O(p)
π
−−−−→O(p + 1)
We prove that the bundle O(p−1) over O(p) is isomorphic to the bundle π∗(O(p))
in the diagram above. The ﬁber of O(p −1) →O(p) over a point (v1, ..., vP −p) ∈
O(p) is given by the unit vectors perpendicular to vP −p, ..., vP −p−n+i+2. The map
O(p) →O(p + 1) takes (v1, ..., vP −p) to (v1, ..., vP −p−1).
The ﬁber of O(p) →
O(p + 1) over the point (v1, ..., vP −p−1) is the set of unit vectors perpendicular to
vP −p−1, ..., vP −p−n+i+1. By the deﬁnition of O(p), vP −p is perpendicular to the
last list, and vP −p−n+i+1 is perpendicular to the ﬁrst list. The two ﬁbers intersect
in a cod-1 great circle which is perpendicular to both vP −p and vP −p−n+i+1. We
can map one ﬁber to the other by mapping vP −p−n+i+1 to vP −p, and by using the
identity map on the great circle of intersection. This deﬁnes a bundle isomorphism,
showing that O(p −1) is isomorphic as a bundle to π∗(O(p)). Since O(p) was a
trivial bundle by induction, it follows that O(p −1) is also a trivial bundle.
□
As a corollary, we see that O(p) is diﬀeomorphic to (Si)P −p. Moreover, we can
inductively deﬁne diﬀeomorphisms ψ(p) : (Si)P −p →O(p), so that the following
diagram is an isomorphism of bundles.
(Si)P −p
ψ(p)
−−−−→
O(p)
y
yπ
(Si)P −p−1
ψ(p+1)
−−−−−→O(p + 1)
The left vertical arrow in this diagram is the map taking (θ1, ..., θP −p−1, θP −p) to
(θ1, ..., θP −p−1). Since ψ is an isomorphism of bundles, if ψ(p)(θ1, ..., θP −p−1, θP −p) =
(v1, ..., vP −p−1, vP −p), then ψ(p)(θ1, ..., θP −p−1, −θP −p) = (v1, ..., vP −p−1, −vP −p).
We are going to construct maps CONp associating to each point of O(p) a convex
subset of the unit ball. In particular we can think of CONp as a map from O(p)


26
LARRY GUTH
to O, deﬁned for each p in the range 0 ≤p ≤P. Our i-pyramid of open sets will
be given by the composition Up = CONp ◦ψ(p). The two rules for the pyramid Up
are equivalent to the following two rules for the map CONp.
Rule 1. CONp(v1, ..., vP −p) ⊂CONp+1(v1, ..., vP −p−1)
Rule 2. CONp(v1, ..., vP −p−1, vP −p) and CONp(v1, ..., vP −p−1, −vP −p) are dis-
joint.
We will deﬁne CONp inductively.
We deﬁne CONP (∗) to be the unit ball.
Suppose we have already deﬁned CONp+1, and we want to deﬁne CONp.
Let
L0 be the hyperplane perpendicular to vP −p.
Let L be the translation of L0
that divides CONp+1(v1, ..., vP −p−1) into two halves of equal volume.
We let
CONp(v1, ..., vP −p) be one of these two halves, chosen as follows. Consider a vector
vP −p starting at a point on L. The end of the vector lies on one side of L, and
CONp(v1, ..., vP −p) is the half of CONp+1(v1, ..., vP −p−1) on this side of L. By
deﬁnition CONp(v1, ..., vP −p) is contained in CONp+1(v1, ..., vP −p−1). Therefore,
Rule 1 holds. Now if we change the sign of the last factor, then the plane L does
not change, only we take the half of CONp+1(v1, ..., vP −p−1) on the other side of
this plane. Hence CONp(v1, ..., vP −p−1, vP −p) and CONp(v1, ..., vP −p−1, −vP −p)
are disjoint, and so Rule 2 holds.
We include a ﬁgure to help see how this construction works. Consider the special
case that i = 1, n = 2, and P = 2. In this case, O(2) is a point ∗, O(1) is the unit cir-
cle S1, and O(0) is the torus (S1)2. The convex set CON2(∗) is the unit disk. We let
v be the unit vector (−1/
√
2, 1/
√
2), and we let w be the unit vector (1, 0). In Fig-
ure 7, we illustrate the convex sets CON1(v), CON0(−v, w), and CON0(−v, −w).
The set CON1(−v) is the union of CON0(−v, w) and CON0(−v, −w).
CON_0(−v,w)
CON_1(v)
CON_0(−v,−w)
Figure 7
Now we have to estimate the k-thickness of this pyramid of convex sets.
We let β be a large number. Our proof will work for each (suﬃciently large) β,
and it will prove the following estimate for the k-thickness T of our i-pyramid.
T ≥c(β, n)[2 −ǫ(β, n)]
n−i−k
n−i
P .


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
27
As β →+∞, the constant ǫ(β, n) →0, but so does c(β, n). Throughout this
section, we make the convention that ǫ = ǫ(β, n) is a constant depending only on
β and n which may change from line to line, but always obeying the condition
limβ→+∞ǫ(β, n) = 0 for each n.
Recall that T = TP (∗) = infv∈O(P −1) TP −1(v)+TP −1(−v). The function TP −1 is
continuous, so we can choose v so that T = TP −1(v) + TP −1(−v). Now we proceed
down. We recall that TP −1(v) = infv1|(v,v1)∈O(P −2) TP −2(v, v1)+TP −2(v, −v1). We
choose v1 so that TP −1(v) = TP −2(v, v1)+TP −2(v, −v1). Similarly, we choose v2 so
that TP −1(−v) = TP −2(−v, v2) + TP −2(−v, −v2). Continuing in this way, we come
to the following situation. At the top level, we have a single convex set C (equal
to the unit ball). At the next level, the set C is chopped into two sets C1 and C2
along some plane, perpendicular to the vector v. The sets have equal volume. Then
each set C1 and C2 is chopped in two. The set C1 is chopped in two along a plane
perpendicular to v1, yielding C11 and C12. The set C2 is chopped in two along the
plane perpendicular to v2, yielding C21 and C22. This proceeds through P levels,
ending up with 2P convex sets. The chopping obeys two rules.
1. Volume bisection. Each chop cuts the given set into two sets of equal volume.
If C has volume 1, then each set at level p has volume 2−p.
2. Orthogonality. Any (n −i) consecutive cuts are orthogonal. More precisely,
if Ip+1, ..., Ip+n−i are strings of 1’s and 2’s, with Iq of length q, so that each
string is formed from the previous by adding a 1 or 2 at the end, then the vectors
vIp+1, ..., vIp+n−i are orthogonal.
We let {1, 2}p denote all strings of 1’s and 2’s of length p. The k-thickness T
of our pyramid of convex sets is equal to (1/2) P
I∈{1,2}P Rad[CI]k. We need to
prove the estimate T ≥c(β, n)(2 −ǫ(β, n))
n−i−k
n−i
P . In the process, we will prove
the following stronger estimate.
X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad[CI]−1 ≤C(β, n)2P (2 + ǫ)P/(n−i).
(∗)
We check that inequality (∗) implies the inequality that we want to prove.
Lemma 4.3. The inequality (∗) implies the inequality
T = (1/2) P
I∈{1,2}P Rad[CI]k ≥c(β, n)(2 −ǫ)
n−i−k
n−i
P .
Proof. We begin with the following trivial equation.
2P =
X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad[CI]
k
k+1 Rad[CI]−
k
k+1 .
Applying the Holder inequality to the right-hand side we get the following.
2P ≤

X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad[CI]k
1
k+1 
X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad[CI]−1
k
k+1 .
We use inequality (∗) to estimate the last factor.
2P ≤C(β, n)

X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad[CI]k
1
k+1 
(2 + ǫ)P/(n−i)2P 
k
k+1 .
Rearranging the terms, we get the following.


28
LARRY GUTH
T = (1/2)
X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad[CI]k ≥c(β, n)2P (2 + ǫ)−kP
n−i .
We are assuming that i ≤n −k −1, and so n −i −k ≥1. Therefore, after
redeﬁning ǫ, we get the following.
T = (1/2)
X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad[CI]k ≥c(β, n)(2 −ǫ)
n−i−k
n−i
P .
□
We would like to work inductively by estimating the quantity P
I∈{1,2}p Rad[CI]−1
as p increases from 0 to P. Unfortunately, I don’t see how to control the behavior
of this quantity inductively. The main idea of the proof is to ﬁnd a related quantity
that behaves better from an inductive point of view and that agrees with Rad[Ci]−1
up to a controlled error.
For each convex set C, let πq(C) be the average q-volume of any orthogonal
projection of C onto any q-plane. (We deﬁne π0(C) = 1 for any convex set.) We
now deﬁne the quantity that we will use in our inductive argument.
Na,β(C) := βa Vol(C)−1/aπn−a(C)1/a.
Nβ(C) :=
sup
1≤a≤n
Na,β(C).
For large β, the function Nβ behaves well in our inductive arguments. We will
prove below that Nβ(C) agrees with Rad[C]−1 up to a factor C(β, n).
In the
proof, we will use the fact that any convex set can be fairly well approximated by
a rectangle, as described in the following lemma.
Lemma 4.4. There is a constant C(n) that makes the following true. For any
bounded open convex set A in Rn, there is a rectangle R so that R ⊂A ⊂C(n)R.
(Here C(n)R denotes the rectangle obtained by magnifying R by a factor C(n)
around its center.)
Proof. Pick a point a0 ∈A.
Then pick a point a1 ∈A as far away as possible from a0. Let P1 denote the
1-plane containing a0 and a1, and let h1 denote the distance from a0 to a1.
Then pick a point a2 ∈A as far away as possible from P1. Let P2 denote the
2-plane containing a0, a1, and a2, and let h2 denote the distance from a2 to P1.
Continuing inductively we pick points ai for 0 ≤i ≤n, and deﬁne Pi to be the
plane spanned by a0, ..., ai, and hi to be the distance from ai to Pi−1.
We now rotate and translate the coordinates of Rn so that the point a0 is the
origin and so that the plane spanned by the ﬁrst i coordinates x1, ..., xi is the plane
Pi. If necessary, we make some reﬂections so that the xi coordinate of ai is hi > 0.
In these coordinates, we can write ai = (ai,1, ..., ai,i−1, hi, 0, ..., 0), where |ai,j| ≤
hj. It follows by induction on the dimension that the convex hull of the ai contains
a rectangle R of the form [r1, s1] × ... × [rn, sn] with 0 < ri < si < hi and si −ri ≥
c(n)hi.
On the other hand, the set A is contained in the rectangle [−h1 × h1] × ... ×
[−hn, hn]. This rectangle is in turn contained in C(n)R for an appropriate dimen-
sional constant C(n).
□


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
29
Given a convex set C we choose a rectangle R obeying the conclusion of the
lemma, and we let R1 ≤... ≤Rn be its dimensions. Then we deﬁne Ri(C) to be
Ri. Since there are many rectangles obeying the conclusion of the lemma, Ri(C) is
not uniquely deﬁned, but it is deﬁned up to a constant factor C(n). The numbers
Ri(C) give a rough description of the shape C.
We now describe the sizes Na,β(C) in terms of the dimensions Ri(C). We ﬁrst
note that πn−a(C) ∼Ra+1...Rn. (We write A ∼B to indicate that A approximates
B up to a factor C(n) depending only on the dimension n.) Using this, we can
describe Na,β(C) up to a constant factor C(n).
Na,β(C) ∼βa(R1...Ra)−1/a.
Using this formula, we now check that Nβ(C) is roughly equal to Rad[C]−1.
Lemma 4.5. For any convex set C, Nβ(C) agrees with Rad[C]−1 up to a factor
C(β, n).
Proof. The invariant Nβ(C) is at least N1,β(C), which is at least c(n)βR−1
1 . The ra-
dius Rad[C] agrees with R1(C) up to a constant factor, and so Nβ(C) ≥c(n)βRad[C]−1.
On the other hand, each Na,β(C) is at most C(n)βa(R1...Ra)−1/a, which is at
most C(n)βnR−1
1 . Using again the fact that R1(C) ∼Rad[C], we conclude that
Nβ(C) ≤C(n)βnRad[C]−1.
□
We need a few more deﬁnitions before we continue. If I is a string of 1’s and 2’s,
we denote the length of I by |I|. Then we deﬁne Dq(I) to be the set of all strings
of 1’s and 2’s of length |I| + q whose ﬁrst |I| entries are I. The expression Dq(I)
stands for the descendants of I after q generations.
We have shown that the function Nβ(C) is roughly Rad(C)−1. The advantage
of Nβ(C) is that it behaves better in inductive arguments, especially for large β.
The key fact is the following lemma which implies that Na,β(CI) behaves well
inductively whenever Ra+1(CI) >> Ra(CI).
Lemma 4.6. Suppose that CI obeys the inequality Ra+1(CI) ≥βRa(CI). Then
the following inequality holds.
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
πn−a(CJ) ≤(2 + ǫ)aπn−a(CI).
Proof. We ﬁrst consider the case a ≥n−i. In this case, the conclusion of the lemma
holds regardless of the dimensions of R(CI). Since CJ ⊂CI, πn−a(CJ) ≤πn−a(CI).
The number of CJ is 2n−i. Therefore, P
J∈Dn−i(I) πn−a(CJ) ≤2n−iπn−a(CI) ≤
2aπn−a(CI). We turn to the interesting case a < n −i.
We pick a particular rectangle R with R ⊂CI ⊂C(n)R and with side lengths
Ri = Ri(CI), and we let P denote the span of the subrectangle with dimensions
R1 × ... × Ra.
If C is any convex set, and if S is a piece of hyperplane in C cutting C into
convex sets A and B, then we have the following formula for any q.
πq(C) + πq(S) = πq(A) + πq(B).
This formula is well-known in integral geometry. It follows because if π is a
projection onto a given q-plane, π( ¯A) ∪π( ¯B) is exactly π( ¯C) and π( ¯A) ∩π( ¯B) is
exactly π( ¯S). The last formula follows because if a ∈π−1(q)∩¯A and b ∈π−1(q)∩¯B,


30
LARRY GUTH
then the line segment from a to b lies in π−1(q) and intersects ¯S. Since taking
closures does not aﬀect the volume of the image, we see that |π(A)| + |π(B)| =
|π(C)| + |π(S)|. Since this formula holds for each projection π, it also holds for the
average, proving our formula.
Also, since S ⊂C, πq(S) ≤πq(C), and so πq(A) + πq(B) ≤2πq(C).
Now, we suppose that CL,1 and CL,2 are immediate descendants of CL, which is
a descendant of CI of generation at most n−i. We let SL denote the hyperplane in
CL which separates CL,1 from CL,2. Since SL is a subset of CL, πq(SL) ≤πq(CL),
which gives us the following inequality.
πn−a(CL,1) + πn−a(CL,2) ≤2πn−a(CL).
(1)
If the angle between vL and P is at least c(n) > 0, then we will prove a stronger
estimate.
In this case, SL is contained in an (n-1)-dimensional rectangle with
dimensions at most C(n) times bigger than R1 × ... × Ra × Ra+2 × ... × Rn. There-
fore, πn−a(SL) ≤C(n)RaRa+2...Rn ≤C(n)β−1Ra+1...Rn.
On the other hand,
πn−a(CL) ≥c(n)Ra+1...Rn. Therefore, we get the following bound, provided that
the angle between vL and P is at least c(n).
πn−a(CL,1) + πn−a(CL,2) ≤(1 + C(n)β−1)πn−a(CL).
(2)
To organize this information, we deﬁne a function h(L) that counts the number of
vectors vM close to P that appear in the ancestors of L. We deﬁne h(L) inductively
as follows. First, h(I) = a. Now, we suppose we have deﬁned h(L), and we want
to deﬁne h on the immediate descendants of L. If the angle between the vector vL
and the plane P is at most c(n), then we deﬁne h(L, 1) = h(L, 2) = h(L) −1. On
the other hand, if the angle is greater than c(n), then we deﬁne h(L, 1) = h(L, 2) =
h(L). With this deﬁnition, we can combine equations (1) and (2) into a single clean
inequality.
(1 + C(n)β−1)2h(L)πn−a(CL) ≥2h(L,1)πn−a(CL,1) + 2h(L,2)πn−a(CL,2).
Applying this inequality repeatedly, we get the following.
(1 + C(n)β−1)n−i2h(I)πn−a(CI) ≥
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
2h(J)πn−a(CJ).
Since any sequence of (n-i) vectors is orthonormal, the number of vectors in any
sequence with angle at most c(n) from P is at most a. Therefore, h(J) ≥0 for
every J ∈Dn−i(I). Since h(I) = a, we get the following inequality.
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
πn−a(CJ) ≤(1 + C(n)β−1)n−i2aπn−a(CI).
This inequality proves our lemma.
□
Using this lemma, we can inductively control the behavior of Na,β.
Lemma 4.7. Suppose that CI obeys the inequality Ra+1(CI) ≥βRa(CI). Then
the following inequality holds.
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
Na,β(CJ) ≤(2 + ǫ)2n−iNa,β(CI).


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
31
Proof. The left-hand side of the inequality we want to prove is
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
βa Vol(CJ)−1/aπn−a(CJ)1/a.
(a)
The volume of CJ is independent of J, and it’s equal to 2−(n−i) Vol(CI). We
apply Holder’s inequality to the term P πn−a(CJ)1/a.
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
πn−a(CJ)1/a ≤2(n−i) a−1
a [
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
πn−a(CJ)]1/a.
Applying the last lemma, we get the following inequality.
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
πn−a(CJ)1/a ≤2(n−i) a−1
a (2 + ǫ)πn−a(CI)1/a.
Putting the last inequality into expression (a), we get the following.
X
J∈Dn−i(I)
βa Vol(CJ)−1/aπn−a(CJ)1/a ≤βa Vol(CI)−1/a2n−i(2 + ǫ)πn−a(CI)1/a.
Plugging in the deﬁnition of Na,β ﬁnishes the proof.
□
The last key observation is that if Na,β(C) = Nβ(C), then Ra+1(C) >> Ra(C).
This observation is made precise in the following lemma.
Lemma 4.8. If Na,β(C) = Nβ(C), then the dimensions of C obey the following
inequality.
Ra+1(C) ≥c(n)β2Ra(C).
Proof. We abbreviate Ri(C) as Ri. Since Na,β(C) = Nβ(C), we know that Na,β(C) ≥
Na−1,β(C) and Na,β(C) ≥Na+1,β(C). Since Na,β(C) ∼βa(R1...Ra)−1/a, we get
the following inequalities.
βaR−1/a
1
...R−1/a
a
≥c(n)βa−1R−1/(a−1)
1
...R−1/(a−1)
a−1
.
(1)
βaR−1/a
1
...R−1/a
a
≥c(n)βa+1R−1/(a+1)
1
...R−1/(a+1)
a+1
.
(2)
In these inequalities and below, we use c(n) to denote a positive constant, de-
pending only on n, whose exact value may change from line to line.
Taking the second equation and moving Ra+1 to the left-hand side and everything
else to the right-hand side, we get the following.
Ra+1 ≥c(n)βa+1R1/a
1
...R1/a
a
.
(3)
By a similar manipulation, the ﬁrst equation implies the following inequality.
R1/a
1
...R1/a
a−1 ≥c(n)β−(a−1)R(a−1)/a
a
.
(4)
Plugging this inequality into equation 3, we get the following.
Ra+1 ≥c(n)β2Ra.
□


32
LARRY GUTH
Combining Lemmas 4.7 and 4.8, we can control the inductive behavior of Nβ(CI).
We now pick a number of generations G(β, n). We choose G just small enough so
that if J is a descendant of I G generations down, then the dimensions Ri(CI)
and Ri(CJ) agree up to a factor of β1/3. The number of generations G will be on
the order of δ(n) log β for a small constant δ(n), because in each generation the
dimensions change by at most a bounded factor C(n). We also arrange that G is
an integer multiple of n −i. (We only need to study the cases when β is large and
so G is large.)
Lemma 4.9. The following inequality holds.
X
J∈DG(I)
Nβ(CJ) ≤n2G(2 + ǫ)G/(n−i)Nβ(CI).
Proof. Suppose that Na,β(CJ) = Nβ(CJ) for some J in DG(I). By Lemma 4.8,
we know that Ra+1(CJ) ≥c(n)β2Ra(CJ). By the deﬁnition of G, we know that
Ra(CI) ≤β1/3Ra(CJ). On the other hand, Ra+1(CI) ≥c(n)Ra+1(CJ) because
CJ ⊂CI. Therefore, Ra+1(CI) ≥c(n)β5/3Ra(CI). Similarly, if K is any descen-
dant of I at most G generations down, then Ra+1(CK) ≥c(n)β4/3Ra(CK).
We are now in a position to apply Lemma 4.7 repeatedly G/(n −i) times. As-
suming that Na,β(CJ) = Nβ(CJ) for some J in DG(I), we conclude the following.
X
J∈DG(I)
Na,β(CJ) ≤2G(2 + ǫ)G/(n−i)Na,β(CI).
Let A denote the set of all a so that for some J, Na,β(CJ) = Nβ(CJ).
X
J∈DG(I)
Nβ(CJ) ≤
X
a∈A
X
J∈DG(I)
Na,β(CJ) ≤
≤
X
a∈A
2G(2 + ǫ)G/(n−i)Na,β(CI) ≤n2G(2 + ǫ)G/(n−i)Nβ(CI).
□
Finally, we apply the last lemma repeatedly. If P is a multiple of G, we get the
following inequality.
X
I∈{1,2}P
Nβ(CI) ≤nP/G(2 + ǫ)P/(n−i)2P Nβ(C).
In general, if P is not a multiple of G, then we can write P as a multiple of
G plus a remainder which is at most G. In the last G generations, the values of
Nβ(CI) change by at most a constant C(β, n), since G depends only on β and n.
So for all P we get the following inequality.
X
I∈{1,2}P
Nβ(CI) ≤C(β, n)nP/G(2 + ǫ)P/(n−i)2P Nβ(C).
In this equation, C denotes the unit ball, which is the top of our pyramid of
convex sets. The term Nβ(C) is a constant depending on β and n. More impor-
tantly, since G ∼δ(n) log β, nP/G grows at an arbitrarily small exponential rate
in P. Therefore, we can absorb the term nP/G into the term (2 + ǫ)P/(n−i), by
changing the deﬁnition of ǫ. We get the following inequality.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
33
X
I∈{1,2}P
Nβ(CI) ≤C(β, n)(2 + ǫ)P/(n−i)2P .
According to Lemma 4.8, Nβ(CI) agrees with Rad[CI]−1 up to a factor C(β, n).
Making this substitution, we get inequality (∗).
X
I∈{1,2}P
Rad(CI)−1 ≤C(β, n)(2 + ǫ)P/(n−i)2P .
(∗)
According to Lemma 4.3, inequality (∗) implies our lower bound on the k-
thickness: T ≥c(β, n)(2 −ǫ)
n−i−k
n−i
P .
□
5. Families of bent overlapping planes
In this section, we construct examples of families of cycles with small volumes,
proving the upper bounds in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2. Here is an outline of the
approach.
We need to construct a family of k-cycles that detects a given cohomology class
α ∈H∗(Z(k, n)). The k-fold suspension map Σ : Z(0, n −k) →Z(k, n) maps a
0-cycle C in the unit ball Bn−k to the product C × Rk restricted to the unit ball
Bn.
The ﬁrst step is to construct a family of 0-cycles that detects Σ∗(α). Applying
Σ, we get a family of k-cycles that detects α. Each cycle in this family is a union
of parallel planes. It turns out that the cycles in this family have volume much
greater than V(α).
The second step is the bend-and-cancel construction described in the introduc-
tion. We carefully pick a degree 1 PL map Ψ, and we apply the map Ψ to get
a new family of cycles where each cycle consists of a union of bent planes. By
choosing Ψ carefully, we arrange that the bent planes overlap a great deal. Since
we are working with families of mod 2 cycles, we can cancel the overlapping parts,
reducing the volume.
Before proving the upper bounds in Theorem 1, we gather a few tools that we
will use. The ﬁrst tool is the k-fold suspension map Σ : Z(0, n −k) →Z(k, n). The
map is deﬁned in the following way. We begin with a 0-cycle C ∈Z(0, n−k). Then
we take the product C × Rk which is a (locally ﬁnite) cycle in Bn−k × Rk. Finally,
we restrict this cycle to the unit ball Bn.
Lemma 5.1. The pullback Σ∗a(k, n) is equal to a(0, n −k).
Proof. Suppose that F : P →Z(0, n −k) is a family of 0-cycles, and suppose
that h is a homology class in Hn−k(P).
We need to check that the pairing <
ΣF∗(h), a(k, n) > is equal to the pairing < F∗(h), a(0, n −k) >. To compute the
second pairing, we ﬁnd a complex of cycles C based closely on the family F. We
let z ⊂P be a simplicial (n-k)-cycle in the homology class h. Then the pairing
< F∗(h), a(0, n −k) > is equal to the degree of the n-cycle C(h). Now we deﬁne
ΣC, a complex of cycles in Bn parametrized by P. For each simplex ∆of P, we let
ΣC(∆) be the product C(∆) × Rk restricted to the unit n-ball. The point of the
proof is that we can use ΣC as the complex of cycles approximating ΣF. Therefore,
the pairing < ΣF∗(h), a(k, n) > is equal to the degree of ΣC(z). Now ΣC(z) is the
product C(z) × Rk restricted to the unit n-ball, so ΣC(z) and C(z) have the same
degree.
□


34
LARRY GUTH
The ﬁrst step also requires a result of Nakaoka about the cohomology ring of a
symmetric product of spheres. Nakaoka completely described the cohomology ring,
but we will need only the following facts.
Theorem. (Nakaoka, [16]) Let SP dSN denote the d-fold symmetric product of the
N-sphere, for N ≥2. The cohomology group HN(SP dSN) is equal to Z2. Let β
denote the generator of this group. Let i denote the inclusion of SN into SP dSN.
(If ∗denotes the base point of SN, then i(x) is deﬁned to be the unordered d-
tuple < x, ∗, ..., ∗>.) Then i∗β is the generator of HN(SN). The top-dimensional
cohomology group HdN(SP dSN) is also isomorphic to Z2, and it is generated by
βd.
The second step is based on the “bending planes around a skeleton” construction
in [8]. In that paper, the following mappings were constructed.
Lemma. ([8]) Let l be a dimension in the range 0 ≤l < n, and let s > 0 be a
scale. Let S denote the l-skeleton of the lattice with sidelength s. Let T denote the
dual (n-l-1)-skeleton.
For each dimension l, each scale s and each ǫ > 0, there is a piecewise-linear
map Ψ from Rn to itself with the following properties. The map Ψ is linear on
each simplex of a certain triangulation of Rn. Each top-dimensional simplex of this
triangulation is labelled good or bad. For each good simplex ∆, Ψ(∆) lies in S.
Each bad simplex lies in the ǫ-neighborhood of T . The triangulation and the map
obey the following bounds.
1. The number of simplices of our triangulation meeting any ball of radius s is
bounded by C(n).
2. The displacement |Ψ(x) −x| is bounded by C(n)s.
3. The diameter of each simplex is bounded by C(n)s.
We call the map Ψ a skeleton-squeezing map, since it squeezes most of Rn into
the l-skeleton S.
Theorem 1. (Upper bounds) The minimax volume V(a(k, n)p) ≤C(n)p
n−k
n .
Proof. The ﬁrst step is to construct a family of cycles F(p) in Z(0, n −k) that
detects the cohomology class a(0, n −k)p. Roughly speaking, the family of all p-
tuples of points in Bn−k does the job. Our argument involves two cases depending
on whether n −k = 1.
If n −k = 1, then we deﬁne F(p) using the roots of polynomials. Let V (p)
be the space of all real polynomials of one variable with degree at most p. The
space V (p) is a vector space of dimension p + 1. To each non-zero polynomial in
V (p), we associate its real roots, taken with multiplicity. This association deﬁnes
a map R0 from V (d) −{0} to the space of integral 0-cycles on the real line, but
the map is NOT continuous. The reason for the discontinuity is that two real roots
may approach each other, become a double root, and then become two conjugate
complex roots.
Since R0 only records the real roots, two real roots can come
together and disappear. We correct this problem by considering the roots with
multiplicity modulo 2. We deﬁne a root map R from V (d) −{0} to Z(0, 1) by
taking the real roots of a polynomial, keeping only the roots in the interval (−1, 1),
and recording the multiplicity modulo 2. The map R is continuous.
For any non-zero real number λ, the polynomials P and λP have the same roots,
and so R induces a map F(p) from RPp = [V (p) −{0}]/R∗to Z(0, 1). We call this
the family of roots of degree d polynomials.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
35
For example, if p = 1, then the map F(1) sends the polynomial ax + b to its
root −b/a. If we ﬁx a = 1, then as b goes from −∞to +∞, the point −b/a goes
from +∞to −∞. So the family F(1) sweeps out the unit ball (−1, 1) with degree
1 modulo 2. Hence F(1)∗(a(0, 1)) is the generator of H1(RP1).
Next we compute that F(p)∗(a(0, 1)) is the generator of H1(RPp). To check this,
we pick a homologically non-trivial curve c in RPp and we check that F(c) sweeps
out the unit interval. We can take the curve c given by the projectivization of the
linear polynomials, V (1) ⊂V (p). The map F(p) restricted to this copy of RP1 is
just F(1), and so the claim follows from the last paragraph. Therefore, the family
F(p) detects a(0, 1)p.
If n −k ≥2, then we deﬁne F(p) using symmetric products of spheres. First
we deﬁne a family F(1) parametrized by Sn−k.
We pick a homeomorphism of
the upper hemisphere with the unit ball.
Then we deﬁne F(1)(x) for x in the
upper hemisphere to be the corresponding point of the unit ball with multiplicity
1. We deﬁne F(1) on the lower hemisphere to be the empty cycle. (We assume
that the basepoint is in the lower hemisphere, so it maps to the empty cycle.)
The family F(1) sweeps out the unit ball and so it detects a(0, n −k). Next we
deﬁne a family F(p) parametrized by the symmetric product SP pSn−k. We deﬁne
F(p) of an unordered p-tuple < x1, ..., xp > to be the sum P
i F(1)(xi). Using
Nakaoka’s theorem, we can check that F(p) detects a(0, n −k)p. First we compute
F(p)∗(a(0, n −k)). The group Hn−k(SP pSn−k) is equal to Z2 and is generated
by the class β, and the inclusion i : Sn−k →SP pSn−k induces an isomorphism
in Hn−k. Therefore, it suﬃces to compute i∗F(p)∗(a(0, n −k)). Unwinding the
deﬁnitions, the map F(p) ◦i is just F(1), which detects a(0, n −k). Therefore,
F(p)∗(a(0, n−k)) is equal to β, and F(p)∗(a(0, n−k)p) is equal to βp. By Nakaoka’s
theorem, βp is non-zero, and so F(p) detects a(0, n −k)p.
In either case, we have constructed a family F(p) in Z(0, n−k) detecting a(0, n−
k)p where each cycle in the family consists of at most p points.
(Remark: The case n−k = 1 is separate because the symmetric product SP pS1
is not a cycle. We could have used the truncated symmetric product T P pS1 as in
[15].)
Next we consider the suspension map Σ : Z(0, n−k) →Z(k, n). Let P(p) denote
the parameter space of the map F(p) above. (If n −k > 1, then P(p) = SP pSn−k.
If n −k = 1, then P(p) = RPp.)
We deﬁne Fk(p) to be Σ ◦F(p) : P(p) →
Z(k, n).
By Lemma 5.1, Σ∗(a(k, n)p) = a(0, n −k)p.
Therefore, Fk(p) detects
a(k, n)p. Each cycle in Fk(p) consists of a union of at most p k-planes parallel to
the (xn−k+1, .., xn)-plane.
Now we turn to the second step, which is to bend the planes so that they overlap
and cancel the overlaps. First we scale the family Fk(p) to get a family of cycles in
the ball B(R) for a radius R that we will choose later. Then we rotate the family
slightly, so that all the k-planes are parallel to a plane P0 at a generic angle with
respect to the coordinate axes. We call the scaled rotated family F. If we restrict
F to the unit ball, we get a family in Z(k, n) that detects a(k, n)p.
Next we bend the cycles using a skeleton-squeezing map Ψ as described above.
The map Ψ depends on three parameters: a dimension l, a scale s, and a small
number ǫ > 0. We choose the dimension l of the skeleton to be k, and we choose
the scale s to be p−1/n. (Later we will choose ǫ > 0 suﬃciently small.) The family
we are trying to construct will be Ψ ◦F restricted to the unit ball.


36
LARRY GUTH
The displacement of Ψ is at most C(n)s ≤C(n). We choose R suﬃciently large
that the displacement is less than R −1. Therefore, Ψ maps the sphere S(R) to
the exterior of the unit ball. Hence, if z is a relative cycle in B(R), then Ψ(z) can
be restricted to a relative cycle in the unit ball. So Ψ ◦F deﬁnes a family of cycles
in the unit ball.
Now deﬁne Ψt to be the family of maps Ψt(x) = (1 −t)x + tΨ(x). We have Ψ0
equal to the identity and Ψ1 equal to Ψ. Each map Ψt has displacement at most
equal to that of Ψ, and so each one maps the sphere S(R) to the exterior of the
unit ball. Hence we get a homotopy of families of cycles. At time 0, we have the
restriction of the family F to the unit ball, which we know detects a(k, n)p. At
time 1, we have the restriction of Ψ ◦F to the unit ball. We conclude that the
latter family also detects a(k, n)p.
We now come to the main point: estimating the volumes of the cycles in Ψ ◦
F. Since the parallel k-planes in F were in general position with respect to the
coordinate axes, each k-plane meets the dual (n-k-1)-skeleton T in at most C(n)
points. By taking ǫ > 0 suﬃciently small, we can guarantee that each k-plane
meets at most C(n) bad simplices in B(R). Therefore, for each k-plane P, the
image Ψ(P) lies in the k-skeleton S except for at most C(n) pieces of plane, each
with volume at most Csk.
Therefore, each cycle in the family of bent planes
lies inside the k-skeleton S except for an exceptional region of volume at most
C(n)psk = C(n)p
n−k
n . The volume of the k-skeleton S intersected with the unit
ball is bounded by C(n)s−nsk = C(n)p
n−k
n . We cancel all overlaps of cycles inside
S, so that each region of S has multiplicity zero or 1. The resulting cycle has total
volume at most C(n)p
n−k
n .
□
To prove the upper bounds in Theorem 2 we need a few more tools. We will use
two more maps between spaces of cycles. The ﬁrst map is the addition map which
sends a d-tuple of cycles (z1, ..., zd) to the sum z1 + ... + zd. The addition in the
space of cycles is commutative, and so we view the addition operation as a map A
from SP dZ(0, m) to Z(0, m).
The second map is the translation map T . For t ∈[−1, 1] and for any cycle
z ∈Z(0, m −1), we deﬁne T (t, z) to be the restriction of {t} × z to unit ball Bm.
The cycle T (t, z) is a translation of the cycle z. We illustrate the map T in Figure
8 below.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
37
−1/2
1/2
1
−1
0
Figure 8
The left half of the ﬁgure shows a 0-cycle C ∈Z(0, 1), consisting of two points.
The right half shows T (1/2, z) ∈Z(0, 2), a 0-cycle in the the 2-disk consisting of
two points.
The map T sends {−1} × Z(0, m −1) and {1} × Z(0, m −1) to the empty cycle
in Z(0, m). Therefore, it deﬁnes a continuous map T : SZ(0, m −1) →Z(0, m),
where SZ(0, m −1) denotes the (non-reduced) suspension of Z(0, m −1).
There is a canonical isomorphism σ : H∗+1(SZ(0, m −1)) →H∗(Z(0, m −1)).
Lemma 5.2. The cohomology class σT ∗a(0, m) = a(0, m −1).
Proof. Let z denote a mod 2 (m-1)-cycle in Z(0, m −1). We need to check that
the pairings < σS∗(a(0, m)), z > and < a(0, m −1), z > agree. To compute the
second pairing, we pick a ﬁne triangulation T ri of z, and we let C be a complex
of cycles based on this triangulation.
Then we compute the degree of the top-
dimensional cycle C(z).
The ﬁrst pairing is the same as < T ∗(a(0, m)), Sz >,
where Sz denotes the suspension of z inside of SZ(0, m −1).
This pairing is
also equal to < a(0, m), T (Sz) >, where we view T (Sz) as a family of cycles in
Z(0, m) parametrized by Sz, the suspension of z. We divide the segment [−1, 1]
into segments of length 1/N. Then we deﬁne a polyhedral decomposition of Sz with
faces of the form ∆×{m/N} or ∆×[m/N, (m+1)/N], where ∆is a simplex of T ri,
our triangulation of z. Now T (Sz) is a family of cycles in Z(0, m) parametrized by
Sz. We can build a complex of cycles ˜C approximating this family by taking ˜C(∆×
{m/N} = C(∆)×{m/N} and ˜C(∆×[m/N, (m+1)/N] = C(∆)×[m/N, (m+1)/N].
It then follows that ˜C(Sz) is equal to the restriction to the unit ball of C(z)×[−1, 1].
Therefore, C(z) and ˜C(Sz) have the same degree, and so < a(0, m −1), z > and
< a(0, m), T (Sz) > are equal.
□
The last tool concerns symmetric products of pseudomanifolds. We use the fol-
lowing vocabulary. Let X be a ﬁnite simplicial complex of dimension N. Let SK(X)
denote the K-skeleton of X. We say that X is an N-dimensional pseudomanifold if
each (N-1)-simplex of X is contained in exactly 2 N-simplices and if X −SN−2(X)
is connected.
An equivalent deﬁnition is that X −SN−2(X) is a connected N-
manifold. An N-dimensional pseudomanifold X has HN(X, Z2) = Z2. We call the
non-trivial element the fundamental homology class of X and denote it by [X]. If
X and Y are N-dimensional pseudomanifolds and F : X →Y is a continuous map,


38
LARRY GUTH
then we deﬁne the degree of F by F∗([X]) = (degF)[Y ]. (The degree lies in Z2.)
If y denotes a generic point in Y , then the degree of F is equal to the number of
preimages F −1(y) taken mod 2, just as for manifolds. We will need the following
lemma about symmetric products of pseudomanifolds.
Lemma 5.3. Suppose that X is an N-dimensional pseudomanifold for N ≥2.
Then the symmetric product SP dX is a (dN)-dimensional pseudomanifold. If X
and Y are N-dimensional pseudomanifolds with N ≥2, F : X →Y is a map, and
SP dF : SP dX →SP dY is the d-fold symmetric product of F, then the degree of
SP dF is equal to the degree of F.
Proof. Suppose X is a pseudomanifold. First we check that Xd is a pseudomanifold.
We have to consider Xd −SdN−2Xd.
This set is an open subset of the d-fold
product of X −SN−2(X), so it is a manifold. Moreover, the complement of this set
in (X −SN−2(X))d has codimension 2, and so this set is connected. Hence Xd is
a pseudomanifold.
Now assume that N ≥2 and consider the symmetric product SP dX.
The
diagonal is the subset of Xd where at least two entries are equal. We can triangulate
Xd so that the diagonal is a subcomplex of dimension N(d −1) ≤dN −2. Let π
denote the quotient map from Xd to SP dX. We choose a triangulation of SP dX
so that π maps the K-skeleton of Xd into the K-skeleton of SP dX for each K. In
particular, the image of the diagonal lies in SdN−2SP dX. Let A denote SP d(X) −
SdN−2SP dX. If we restrict the quotient map π to π−1(A) we get a covering map.
Therefore, π−1(A) is an open subset of Xd −SdN−2Xd, and hence a manifold.
Moreover, the complement of π−1(A) in Xd −SdN−2Xd has codimension 2, so
π−1(A) is a connected manifold. Therefore A is the quotient of a connected manifold
by a ﬁnite group acting freely and properly, and so A is a connected manifold.
Therefore SP dX is a pseudomanifold.
Now assume that X, Y are N-dimensional pseudomanifolds, N ≥2, and that
F : X →Y is a continuous map. We let F d denote the product map from Xd to
Y d. By the Kunneth theorem, the degree of F d is equal to the degree of F raised to
the power d. Since we are working mod 2, the degree of F and the degree of F d are
equal. Finally we check that the degree of SP dF is the same as the degree of F d.
Let y denote a generic point in SP dY . To compute the degree of SP dF, we count
the number of preimages in [SP dF]−1(y). The point y has d! preimages in Y d. Let
y1 be one of these preimages. To compute the degree of F d, we count the number
of preimages in [F d]−1(y1). Because π is a covering over generic points, there is
one preimage of y1 in Xd lying over each preimage of y in SP dX. Therefore, the
degree of F d is equal to the degree of SP dF.
□
Theorem 2. (Upper bounds) The minimax volume V(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)) ≤
C(n) Qn−k−1
i=0
2
n−k−i
n−i
Qi.
Proof. We begin by considering the space of 0-cycles Z(0, m). For each cohomol-
ogy class of the form SqQ0
0 ...SqQm−1
m−1 a(0, m), we will construct a family of 0-cycles
Fm(Q0, ..., Qm−1) that detects it. These families of 0-cycles are based on certain
families of subsets of the unit sphere that were explained to me by David Wilson.
We will abbreviate SqQ0
0 ...SqQm−1
m−1 a(0, m) by SqQa(0, m) and Fm(Q0, ..., Qm−1)
by Fm(Q). The parameter space of Fm(Q0, ..., Qm−1) will be called Pm(Q0, ..., Qm−1).


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
39
Each parameter space will be a pseudomanifold, and we will check that the pairing
< Fm(Q)∗(SqQa(0, m)), [Pm(Q)] >= 1.
The construction is inductive in the dimension m. The base case is m = 1, and
here we have to deﬁne F1(Q0). The family F1(Q0) needs to detect SqQ0
0 a(0, 1) =
a(0, 1)2Q0. We constructed such a family at the beginning of the proof of Theorem
1 (upper bounds), by looking at the set of roots of polynomials of degree 2Q0. This
family is parametrized by real projective space, so we have P1(Q0) = RP2Q0 . We
checked in the proof of Theorem 1 that the pairing < F1(Q0)∗(SqQ0
0 a(0, 1)), [P1(Q0)] >=
1.
We can now inductively deﬁne Fm(Q0, ..., Qm−1), using the addition map A and
the translation map T , deﬁned above. By the inductive hypothesis, we suppose we
already have a family Fm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1) : Pm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1) →Z(0, m −1).
We ﬁrst deﬁne Fm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1). In this case, we deﬁne the parameter space
Pm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1) to be the suspension SPm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1).
We deﬁne the
map Fm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1) according to the following diagram.
SPm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)
SFm−1(Q1,...,Qm−1)
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→SZ(0, m −1)
T
−−−−→Z(0, m)
We still have to deﬁne Fm(Q0, ..., Qm−1) for Q0 > 0. To save space, we intro-
duce the following notation. We use X to denote the space Pm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1),
and we use f to denote the map Fm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1) : X →Z(0, m). We deﬁne
Pm(Q0, ..., Qm−1) to be the symmetric product SP 2Q0X. To save space, we use d
to denote 2Q0. Now we deﬁne Fm(Q0, ..., Qm−1) as the following composition.
SP dX
SP df
−−−−→SP dZ(0, m)
A
−−−−→Z(0, m)
To begin, we verify that Pm(Q) is a pseudomanifold. We already checked that
P1(Q0) is a pseudomanifold. We assume that Pm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1) is a pseudomani-
fold. The suspension of a pseudomanifold is a pseudomanifold, so SPm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)
is a pseudomanifold. The pseudomanifold Pm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1) has dimension at
least 1, and so its suspension has dimension at least 2. Therefore the symmetric
product SP 2Q0SPm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1) is a pseudomanifold.
Next we have to check that the pairing < Fm(Q)∗(SqQa(0, m)), [Pm(Q)] >= 1.
Again we proceed inductively. We have already checked this equation for m = 1.
By induction, we assume that it holds for m −1.
First we consider the special case that Q0 = 0. By deﬁnition we need to compute
the following pairing.
< Fm(0, Q1, ...Qm−1)∗(SqQ1
1 ...SqQm−1
m−1 a(0, m)), [Pm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1)] >
Plugging in the deﬁnitions of Fm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1) and Pm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1), we
get the following expression.
=< SFm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)∗T ∗(SqQ1
1 ...SqQm−1
m−1 a(0, m)), [SPm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)] >
Using the suspension isomorphism and the fact that T ∗commutes with Steenrod
squares, we get the following expression.
=< Fm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)∗σ(SqQ1
1 ...SqQm−1
m−1 T ∗a(0, m)), [Pm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)] > .
Steenrod squares commute with σ. In other words, σSqiα = Sqiσα, as described
in [11]. We are using lower squares. Rewriting lower squares in terms of upper


40
LARRY GUTH
squares, it follows that σSqiα = Sqi−1σα. Using this equation, we can interchange
σ with the Steenrod squares to get the following formula.
=< Fm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)∗(SqQ1
0 ...SqQm−1
m−2 σT ∗a(0, m)), [Pm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)] > .
According to Lemma 5.2, σT ∗a(0, m) = a(0, m−1). Substituting a(0, m−1) for
σT ∗a(0, m) in the expression above leaves the following.
=< Fm−1(Q)∗(SqQ1
0 ...SqQm−1
m−2 a(0, m −1)), [Pm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1)] > .
By our inductive hypothesis, this pairing is equal to 1.
To ﬁnish the inductive step, we have to deal with the case that Q0 > 0. Let α
denote SqQ1
1 ...SqQm−1
m−1 a(0, m). Using the abbreviations above, we have just checked
that the pairing < f ∗α, [X] > is equal to 1. To ﬁnish our induction, we need to
check that < (A ◦SP df)∗αd, [SP dX] >= 1.
Let N be the dimension of the cohomology class α, and so also the dimension of
X. Let g : X →SN be a map of degree 1 (mod 2).
Recall that X is a suspension. We let x0 be the vertex of one of the two cones
whose union is X, and we consider x0 to be a basepoint for X. Then we choose a
basepoint p0 in SN, arranging that g(x0) = p0. Using the basepoints, we deﬁne the
embedding i : X →SP dX by taking a point x to the d-tuple < x, x0, ..., x0 > and
the embedding i : SN →SP dSN by taking a point p to the d-tuple < p, p0, ..., p0 >.
Since f = T ◦SFm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1), f maps the vertex x0 to the empty cycle.
Therefore, the following diagram commutes.
Z(0, m)
f
←−−−−
X
g
−−−−→
SN
y=
yi
yi
Z(0, m)
A◦SP df
←−−−−−SP d(X)
SP dg
−−−−→SP dSN
According to Nakaoka ([16]), HN(SP dSN, Z2) = Z2. Let β be the generator of
this group. According to Nakaoka ([16]), i∗(β) is the non-trivial cohomology class
ω in HN(SN, Z2).
Let ˜α = (A ◦SP df)∗(α) and let ˜β = (SP dg)∗(β).
In order to compute our pairing, we will prove that ˜αd = ˜βd.
Since g is degree 1, we know that g∗ω = f ∗α.
Because of the commutative
diagram, i∗˜α = i∗˜β.
We write ˜αd −˜βd = (˜α −˜β)(˜αd−1 + ˜αd−2 ˜β + ... + ˜βd−1) = (˜α −˜β)˜αd−1 + ... +
(˜α −˜β)˜βd−1. We will prove that each summand in this formula vanishes, using
Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory.
We write SP dX as a union of d + 1 contractible open sets. This construction
uses the fact that X is a suspension. It generalizes the fact that a suspension is
the union of two contractible open sets. We write X = SY for some space Y , and
we think of SY as [0, 1] × Y with each component of the boundary contracted to
a point. We let t : X →[0, 1] denote the projection from [0, 1] × Y onto the ﬁrst
coordinate. Then for each point in SP dX we get an unordered d-tuple of times
< t1, ..., td >. For 0 ≤k ≤d, we deﬁne an open set Uk ∈SP dX to be the set of
points where k of the times ti are (strictly) greater than 1/(k + 2) and the other
d −k times are (strictly) less than 1/(k + 2). The set Uk is contractible: homotope
all the times less than 1/(k + 2) to zero and all the times more than 1/(k + 2) to 1.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
41
We prove by induction on d that the sets Uk cover SP dX. When d = 1, this is
true, because either t1 < 1/2 and our point is in U0, or else t1 > 1/3 and our point is
in U1. Now suppose that the result holds for d−1. If all ti are more than 1/(d+2),
then our point lies in Ud. If not, there is at least one ti ≤1/(d + 2). Renumber the
points so that td ≤1/(d + 2). Now look at the (d-1)-tuple of remaining points. By
induction, it lies in Uk for some 0 ≤k ≤d −1. In other words, k of the d −1 other
times are more than 1/(k + 2) and d −1 −k of the d −1 remaining times are less
than 1/(k + 2). But td ≤1/(d + 2) < 1/(k + 2). Hence for the original d-tuple, k
of the d times are more than 1/(k + 2) and the other d −k are less than 1/(k + 2).
In other words, our point lies in Uk.
Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory immediately implies that any (d+1)-fold cup
product vanishes on SP dX.
In our application, we have to deal with a d-fold
cup product. The next step is to show that ˜α −˜β vanishes on the union of U0
and U1. This union is not contractible. We will show instead that it contracts
to i(X) ⊂SP dX.
Since i is an embedding, and since we checked above that
i∗(˜α −˜β) = 0, it will follow that ˜α −˜β vanishes on the union of U0 and U1.
Now we check that the union of U0 and U1 contracts to i(X). If a point lies in
this union, then either it has d times less than 1/2, or else it has d −1 times less
than a 1/3. In either case, it has d −1 times less than 1/2. Let ht : [0, 1] →[0, 1]
be a homotopy with h0 the identity, ht(0) = 0 and ht(1) = 1. We can choose ht so
that h1 maps [0, 1/2] to 0. By taking the product with the identity map, we can
think of ht as a homotopy of maps from [0, 1]×Y to [0, 1]×Y . Since each boundary
component is mapped to itself, our homotopy descends to a homotopy of maps from
X to X. Finally, taking the d-fold symmetric product, we get a homotopy of maps
from SP dX to itself. The ﬁnal map, SP dh1 maps our union into i(X). The times
of h1(< x1, ..., xd >) are < h1(t1), ..., h1(td) >. Since d −1 times ti are less than
1/2, d −1 of the points h1(xi) are the basepoint x0. Hence SP dh1 maps our union
into i(X).
Since ˜α −˜β vanishes on the union of U0 and U1, and since any cohomology class
vanishes on Uk for 2 ≤k ≤d, Lusternik-Schnirelmann theory implies that each
cohomology class (˜α −˜β) ∪˜αe ∪˜βd−e−1 vanishes on SP dX. Summing these terms,
we conclude that ˜αd = ˜βd.
We want to compute the pairing < (A ◦SP df)∗αd, [SP dX] >=< ˜αd, [SP dX] >.
By our result above, this pairing is the same as < ˜βd, [SP dX] >. We can evaluate
this last pairing by pushing it over to SP dSN. It is equal to < βd, (SP dg)∗[SP dX] >.
We know that g has degree 1. According to Lemma 5.3, SP dg also has degree 1.
Hence our pairing is equal to < βd, [SP dSN] >. According to Nakaoka’s Theorem,
this pairing is equal to 1. This ﬁnishes our induction on m. We have now computed
the pairing < SqQa(0, m), Fm(Q) >= 1.
Using the k-fold suspension map Σ we can construct families of k-cycles. We
deﬁne Pk,n(Q) to be Pn−k(Q). Then we deﬁne Fk,n(Q) : Pk,n(Q) →Z(k, n) to
be Σ ◦Fn−k(Q). Since Σ∗a(k, n) = a(0, n −k), it follows that Fk,n(Q) detects
SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n). This ﬁnishes the ﬁrst step of the proof.
We take a little time to describe the geometry of the cycles in Fk,n(Q). These
geometric facts will be used to bound the volumes of cycles in our ﬁnal family. Of
course each cycle in Fn−k(Q) is a union of points. A simple induction argument
shows that the number of points is at most 2Q0...2Qn−k−1. Besides the number of
points in each cycle, we will need to use some information about the way the points


42
LARRY GUTH
are arranged. For every l in the range 0 ≤l ≤n−k, each cycle in Fn−k(Q) lies in a
union of at most 2Q0...2Qn−l−1 l-planes, each parallel to the (xn−l+1, .., xn−k)-plane
in Rn−k. We verify this claim by induction on n −k. When n −k = 1, F1(Q0) is
the family of all roots of a degree 2Q0 polynomial. Each set of roots has at most
2Q0 points, and they trivially lie in one line. We proceed by induction on n −k,
assuming that the result holds for n −k = m −1. First we consider the family
Fm(0, Q1, ..., Qm−1). Each cycle in this family has the form {t} × C, where C is
a cycle in Fm−1(Q1, ..., Qm−1) and t ∈[−1, 1]. By induction on m, this cycle lies
in 2Q1...2Qm−l−1 l-planes for each 0 ≤l ≤m −1. Now we consider the family
Fm(Q0, ..., Qm−1) for Q0 > 0. This cycle is a union of 2Q0 cycles of the kind above.
Therefore, it lies in a union of 2Q0...2Qm−l−1 l-planes for each 0 ≤l ≤m −1. Also,
any of these cycles trivially lies in one m-plane.
Each cycle in Fk,n(Q) has the form Σ(C) where C is a cycle in Fn−k(Q). There-
fore, each cycle in Fk,n(Q) is a union of at most 2Q0...2Qn−k−1 k-planes each parallel
to the (xn−k+1, ..., xn)-plane. Moreover, for every l ≥k, each cycle in Fk,n(Q) lies
in a union of at most 2Q0...2Qn−l−1 l-planes, all parallel to the (xn−l+1, ..., xn)-plane.
Before turning to the bending map Ψ, we rotate the family Fk,n to a generic
angle, and we dilate it so that we have a family of relative k-cycles in the ball
B(R). The map Ψ we will choose has displacement bounded by C(n) independent
of Q. We choose R big enough that the displacement of Ψ is less than R −1.
Imitating the proof of Theorem 1, it follows that the restriction of ΨFk,n(Q) to the
unit ball detects the cohomology class SqQa(k, n). Now we come to the heart of
the matter: how to choose the bending map Ψ so that each cycle in ΨFk,n(Q) has
small volume.
The ﬁrst approach one might try is to use the skeleton-squeezing map Ψ to push
most of the parallel k-planes into the k-skeleton of a lattice with a given side length.
This is the strategy that we employed in the proof of Theorem 1. If we use a lattice
of side length s, then each k-plane is pushed into the k-skeleton except for a region of
ﬁnal volume at most C(n)sk. On the other hand, the total volume of the k-skeleton
of side length s is roughly C(n)sk−n. Cancelling the overlaps and optimizing s, we
end up with a family of cycles each having volume at most C(n)2
n−k
n
P Qi. For most
vectors Q, this volume is still much larger than the upper bound we want to prove.
We can improve this approach, because the cycles in Fk,n(Q) are not arbitrary
unions of at most 2
P Qi parallel k-planes. They also obey a second property, which
we noted above. For every l ≥k, each cycle in Fk,n(Q) lies in a union of at most
2Q0...2Qn−l−1 l-planes, all parallel to the (xn−l+1, ..., xn)-plane. We will choose a
map Ψ that takes advantage of this structure.
Our map Ψ will be a composition of skeleton-squeezing maps. The maps occur
at diﬀerent scales and use skeleta of diﬀerent dimensions. We use Ψ[l,s] to denote a
squeezing map to the l-skeleton at scale s. Next we deﬁne a sequence of scales si =
Qi
j=0 2−
Qj
n−j . We have s0 ≥s1 ≥s2... Our map Ψ is the composition Ψ[k,sn−k−1] ◦
... ◦Ψ[n−1,s0]. Roughly speaking, we ﬁrst squeeze most of space into the (n-1)-
skeleton of the lattice of side length s0. Then we squeeze most of space into the
(n-2)-skeleton of the ﬁner lattice with sidelength s1, and so on.
Technically, we need to describe the map Ψ[l,s] in more detail. First of all, the
map depends on a parameter ǫl > 0. As we go along, we will need to choose these
parameters so that ǫk << ǫk+1 << ... << ǫn−1. There is a second complication
that we have to introduce. In the original deﬁnition of Ψ, we used a lattice centered


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
43
at the origin. In the course of our estimates, however, we will need to use a general
position argument. Therefore, when we construct the map Ψ[l,s], we use a lattice
centered at a generic point instead of the origin. (For each l, we use a diﬀerent
lattice centered at a diﬀerent generic point.)
The volume of cycles in ΨFk,n(Q) is controlled inductively by the following
lemma.
Lemma 5.4. For each l in the range k ≤l ≤n, each cycle in the family Ψ[l,sn−l−1]◦
... ◦Ψ[n−1,s0]Fk,n(Q) lies in a union of at most C(n) Qn−l−1
m=0
2Qm pieces of l-plane,
each of diameter at most Csn−l−1.
Proof. The proof is by backwards induction, beginning with the case l = n. When
l = n, the claim is basically vacuous. It just asserts that each cycle in Fk,n(Q) lies
in 1 piece of n-plane with diameter on the order of 1.
We now assume the lemma holds for l and we need to prove it for l −1.
Let C0 be a cycle in Fk,n(Q), and let C be the image Ψ[l,sn−l−1] ◦...◦Ψ[n−1,s0]C0.
We have to control the geometry of Ψ[l−1,sn−l]C. To do this, we divide the cycle C
into two parts. We let G be the union of the good simplices for the map Ψ[l−1,sn−l]
and we let B be the union of the bad simplices.
Then we consider separately
Ψ[l−1,sn−l](C ∩B) and Ψ[l−1,sn−l](C ∩G).
First we deal with the bad simplices. We know that C0 is contained in a union
of parallel l −1-planes Ha for a = 1, ..., 2Q0...2Qn−l. The bad set B lies in the ǫl−1-
neighborhood of an (n-l)-skeleton T . We let ¯T denote the inverse image (Ψ[l,sn−l−1]◦
... ◦Ψ[n−1,s0])−1(T ). Since T is a skeleton of a lattice whose center is in general
position, its inverse image ¯T is an (n-l)-complex. (The complex T has ﬁnitely many
faces that are each pieces of (n−l)-plane. The map we are considering is a PL map.
We can cut the domain into ﬁnitely many simplices so that the map is linear on
each simplex. Now for each simplex and each face, we look at Map(simplex)∩face.
Because the face has been translated by a generic vector, the intersection has the
expected dimension, and so the inverse image of the given face intersected with the
given simplex lies in a plane of the expected dimension.)
We let ¯B denote the inverse image (Ψ[l,sn−l−1] ◦... ◦Ψ[n−1,s0])−1(B). Since all
Ψ are PL, we can choose ǫl−1 suﬃciently small that ¯B is contained in the Cǫl−1
neighborhood of ¯T.
(Remark: The constant C here depends on the choice of
ǫl, ..., ǫn−1.) Since the angle of the planes Ha is in general position, the intersection
Ha∩¯T consists of at most C(n) points. Using general position again, the intersection
Ha ∩¯B is contained in at most C(n) balls of radius at most Cǫl−1. When we apply
Ψ[n−1,s0] to these pieces, we stretch by a factor C, and we may bend each piece
into C(n) diﬀerent planes. As long as ǫl−1 is suﬃciently small, a ball of radius
Cǫl−1 meets at most C(n) simplices of the triangulations for any of the maps
Ψ[l,sn−l−1], ..., Ψ[n−1,s0]. Therefore, the image Ψ[l,sn−l−1] ◦... ◦Ψ[n−1,s0](Ha) ∩B is
contained in a union of at most C(n) pieces of plane each of diameter at most Cǫl−1.
Each of these pieces of plane meets at most C(n) simplices of the triangulation
for Ψ[l−1,sn−l]. In summary, the intersection (Ψ[l,sn−l−1] ◦... ◦Ψ[n−1,s0]Ha) ∩B is
contained in a union of at most C(n) pieces of plane, each piece of plane lying in a
single bad simplex. Adding the contributions from all the planes, we see that C ∩B
is contained in a union of at most C(n)2Q0...2Qn−l pieces of (l-1)-plane, each piece
of plane lying in a single bad simplex. If ∆is any simplex in the triangulation for
Ψ[l−1,sn−l], then the image of ∆has diameter at most C(n)sn−l. Therefore, the


44
LARRY GUTH
image Ψ[l−1,sn−l](C ∩B) is contained in a union of at most C(n)2Q0...2Qn−l pieces
of (l-1)-plane, each of diameter at most C(n)sn−l.
Second we deal with the good simplices.
At this step we use the inductive
hypothesis, which tells us that C is contained in a union of C(n)2Q0...2Qn−l−1 pieces
of l-plane, each of diameter at most C(n)sn−l−1. The image Ψ[l−1,sn−l](C ∩G) is
contained in the (l-1)-skeleton of a lattice of side length sn−l. We also know that
the map Ψ[l−1,sn−l] moves each point at most C(n)sn−l. If P is a piece of l-plane
of diameter at most C(n)sn−l−1, then Ψ[l−1,sn−l](P ∩G) lies in the part of the
(l-1)-skeleton of side length sn−l within a distance Csn−l of P. This portion of
skeleton can be covered by C(n)[sn−l−1/sn−l]l (l-1)-faces, each of diameter at most
C(n)sn−l. Plugging in the deﬁnition of si, we see that [sn−l−1/sn−l]l = 2Qn−l.
Therefore, Ψ[l−1,sn−l](C ∩G) can be covered by C(n)2Q0...2Qn−l pieces of (l-1)-
plane of diameter at most C(n)sn−l.
□
In particular, each cycle in ΨFk,n(Q) = Ψ[k,sn−k−1] ◦...◦Ψ[n−1,s0]Fk,n(Q) is con-
tained in a union of C(n)2Q0...2Qn−k−1 pieces of k-plane, each with diameter at most
Csn−k−1. So each cycle has total volume at most C(n)2Q0...2Qn−k−1(sn−k−1)k.
Plugging in the deﬁnition of sn−k−1, we see that each cycle has volume at most
C(n)2Q0...2Qn−k−1 Qn−k−1
j=0
2−
k
n−j Qj = C(n) Qn−k−1
i=0
2
n−k−i
n−i
Qi. Since ΨFk,n(Q) de-
tects SqQa(k, n), V(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n)) ≤C(n) Qn−k−1
i=0
2
n−k−i
n−i
Qi.
□
6. Families of algebraic cycles
In this section, we give some examples of families of cycles coming from algebraic
geometry. These examples can be used to give alternate proofs of the upper bounds
in certain cases of Theorem 1 and Theorem 2. Although they don’t cover all the
cases covered in the previous section, these examples are simpler in some ways
than the examples using bent planes. I had several reasons for including them.
First, seeing examples of families of cycles helps to put the results of the paper
into context. Second, it looks plausible to me that these examples give the optimal
values of V(α) for certain α. Third, families of complex algebraic varieties give the
only proofs of certain upper bounds for families of integral cycles, as described in
Appendix 2.
There is one important technicality.
It is not trivial to prove that algebraic
families of algebraic cycles actually form continuous families in Z(k, n). At the end
of the section, we give a self-contained proof that families of algebraic hypersurfaces
are continuous in Z(n−1, n). This argument makes Examples 2, 3, and 5 completely
rigorous.
Right now, Example 4 is not completely rigorous.
Example 1. The roots of a polynomial.
Let V (d) be the space of all real polynomials of one variable with degree at most
d. The space V (d) is a vector space of dimension d+1. To each non-zero polynomial
in V (d), we associate its real roots, taken with multiplicity. This association deﬁnes
a map R0 from V (d) −{0} to the space of integral 0-cycles on the real line, but
the map is NOT continuous. The reason for the discontinuity is that two real roots
may approach each other, become a double root, and then become two conjugate
complex roots.
Since R0 only records the real roots, two real roots can come
together and disappear.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
45
We correct this problem by considering the roots with multiplicity modulo 2.
We deﬁne a root map R from V (d) −{0} to Z(0, 1) by taking the real roots of
a polynomial, keeping only the roots in the interval (−1, 1), and recording the
multiplicity modulo 2. The map R is continuous.
For any non-zero real number λ, the polynomials P and λP have the same roots,
and so R induces a map F(d) from RPd = [V (d) −{0}]/R∗to Z(0, 1). We call this
the family of roots of degree d polynomials.
For example, if d = 1, then the map F(1) sends the polynomial ax + b to its
root −b/a. If we ﬁx a = 1, then as b goes from −∞to +∞, the point −b/a goes
from +∞to −∞. So the family F(1) sweeps out the unit ball (−1, 1) with degree
1 modulo 2. Hence F(1)∗(a(0, 1)) is the generator of H1(RP1).
Next we compute that F(d)∗(a(0, 1)) is the generator of H1(RPd). To check this,
we pick a homologically non-trivial curve c in RPd and we check that F(c) sweeps
out the unit interval. We can take the curve c given by the projectivization of the
linear polynomials, V (1) ⊂V (d). The map F(d) restricted to this copy of RP1 is
just F(1), and so the claim follows from the last paragraph. Therefore, the family
F(d) detects a(0, 1)d.
Example 2. Planar real algebraic curves.
Now let V (d, 2) denote the vector space of real polynomials in two variables
with total degree at most d.
The vector space V (d, 2) has dimension
 d+2
2

=
(1/2)(d2 + 3d + 2). We let RPD(d,2) be the projectivization of V (d, 2) −{0}. The
dimension D(d, 2) = (1/2)(d2+3d). To each equivalence class [P] in RPD(d,2) we can
associate the real algebraic variety deﬁned by P(x, y) = 0. We deﬁne F(d, 2)([P])
to be the restriction of this real algebraic variety to the unit disk, considered as a
mod 2 relative Lipschitz cycle.
As in the ﬁrst example, F(d, 2)∗(a(1, 2)) is the generator of H1(RPD(d,2)). We
can see this by the same argument. The polynomials of the form ax1 + b make up
a linear copy of RP1 ⊂RPD(d,2). The map F(d, 2) restricted to this RP1 gives a
family of parallel vertical lines sweeping out the unit disk. In other words, a(1, 2)
evaluated on F(d, 2)∗([RP1]) is equal to 1, and so F(d, 2)∗(a(1, 2)) is the generator
of H1(RPD(d,2)). Therefore, the family F(d, 2) detects a(1, 2)p for all p ≤D(d, 2).
By a standard argument, we can bound the length of a real algebraic curve in
terms of the degree using the Crofton formula.
The Crofton formula expresses
the length of a curve C in the plane as an appropriate average of the number of
intersections of C with all the lines in the plane. Suppose that C is a degree d
algebraic curve intersected with the unit disk, and let S1 denote the unit circle. If
a line L does not meet the open disk, then L has zero intersections with C. If L
does intersect the open disk, then it intersects S1 twice. Because C has degree d, it
intersects almost every line L at most d times. By the Crofton formula, the length
of C is at most (d/2) times the length of S1. So the length of C is at most πd.
(I suspect that the sharp constant is 2d, given by a union of d lines through the
origin, but I don’t know how to prove it.)
This example proves that V(a(1, 2)p) ≤πd for any p ≤D(d, 2) = (1/2)(d2 −3d).
Hence V(a(1, 2)p) ≤Cp1/2, proving the upper bound in Theorem 1 in case k = 1
and n = 2.
Example 3. Real algebraic hypersurfaces.


46
LARRY GUTH
There is an analogous family of real algebraic hypersurfaces in any dimension.
Let V (d, n) denote the vector space of real polynomials in n variables of total
degree at most d. We let RPD(d,n) be the projective space given by the quotient
[V (d, n)−{0}]/R∗. The dimension D(d, n) grows like dn in the sense that c(n)dn ≤
D(d, n) ≤C(n)dn for positive constants c(n) < C(n). We deﬁne F(d, n) to be the
map sending an equivalence class [P] to the real algebraic variety P(x1, ..., xn) = 0
intersected with the unit n-ball. As in the case of curves, F(d, n) gives a continuous
map from RPD(d,n) to Z(n −1, n).
The pullback F(d, n)∗(a(n −1, n)) is again the generator of H1(RPD(d,n)). The
proof is essentially the same as for curves. We consider a linear RP1 ⊂RPD(d,n)
given by the polynomials of the form ax1 + b. The restriction of F(d, n) to this
RP1 is a family of parallel hyperplanes x1 = constant sweeping out the unit n-ball.
Therefore, the pairing of a(n −1, n) with F(d, n)∗([RP1]) is equal to 1, proving the
claim. Therefore, F(d, n) detects a(n −1, n)p for any p ≤D(d, n).
As for curves, the Crofton formula allows us to bound the volume of a degree d
real algebraic hypersurface in the unit n-ball by C(n)d. This example proves that
V(a(n −1, n)p) ≤C(n)d for any p ≤D(d, n). Since D(d, n) ≥c(n)dn, it follows
that V(a(n −1, n)p) ≤C(n)p1/n. This proves the upper bound in Theorem 1 in
the case that k = n −1.
Example 4. Complex algebraic hypersurfaces.
If the dimension n is even, we can think of Bn as the unit ball in Cn/2, and
we can consider families of complex hypersurfaces.
If we consider the complex
hypersurfaces as mod 2 cycles, we get a family FC(d, n), mapping CPDC(d,n) to Z(n−
2, n). The dimension DC(d, n) grows like dn/2. The pullback FC(d, n)∗(a(n −2, n))
is the generator of H2(CPDC(d,n), Z2). Therefore, this family detects a(n −2, n)p
for p ≤DC(d, n) ≤C(n)dn/2. By the complex version of the Crofton formula,
each degree d complex hypersurface in the unit ball has volume at most C(n)d.
This example proves that V(a(n −2, n)p) ≤C(n)p2/n, giving the upper bound in
Theorem 1 in case k = n −2 and n is even.
Complex cycles are canonically oriented, so we can also look at the degree d
hypersurfaces as families of integral cycles. We discuss integral cycles in Appendix
2.
Example 5. Products of the previous examples.
By taking Cartesian products we can produce a variety of new families of cycles.
For example, F(d1, n1)×F(d2, n2) is a map from RPD(d1,n1)×RPD(d2,n2) to Z(n1+
n2 −2, n1 + n2). The pullback of a(n1 + n2 −2, n1 + n2) is given by the tensor
product ω1 ⊗ω2, where ωi is the generator of H1(RPD(di,ni)).
Most of these families have unnecessarily large maximal volumes, and so they
are not useful for proving the upper bounds in Theorem 1 and Theorem 2. We
focus on only a few cases, where the maximal volume is near to optimal. The cases
involve products with the trivial family which consists of a point moving across an
interval. This family is called F(1, 1), the family that gives the root of a linear
polynomial in one variable, described in Example 1 above. (We called it F(1) at
the time.)
Consider the product F(d, n)×F(1, 1), which is a family of cycles in Z(n−1, n+1)
parametrized by RPD(d,n) × S1. Let ω denote the generator of H1(RPD(d,n)), and


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
47
let β denote the generator of H1(S1). Then the pullback of a(n −1, n + 1) by our
family is ω ⊗β.
This family detects certain towers of Steenrod squares applied to a(n−1, n+1).
More precisely, if 2Q ≤D(d, n), then this family detects SqQ
1 a(n −1, n + 1). In
order to see this, consider the smash product map RPD(d,n) × S1 →SRPD(d,n).
The cohomology class ω × β is the pullback of the generator of H2(SRPD(d,n)).
Because Steenrod squares commute with suspensions, it follows that SqQ
1 (ω ⊗β) =
(SqQ
0 ω) ⊗β = ω2Q ⊗β.
Since 2Q ≤D(d, n), ω2Q is a non-vanishing class in
H∗(RPD(d,n)) and ω2Q ⊗β is a non-vanishing class in H∗(RPD(d,n) × S1).
A cycle in F(d, n) × F(1, 1) is just a product of a cycle in F(d, n) with a point,
and so it has volume at most C(n)d. This example proves that V(SqQ
1 a(n −1, n +
1)) ≤C(n)d as long as 2Q ≤D(d, n) ≤C(n)dn. In other words, it shows that
V(SqQ
1 a(n −1, n + 1)) ≤C(n)2Q/n.
If we write N = n + 1, then we get the
inequality V(SqQ
1 a(N −2, N)) ≤C(N)2
1
N−1 Q. This inequality is the upper bound
in Theorem 2 in the special case that k = N −2 and Qi = 0 for i ̸= 1.
More generally, we can consider the product F(d, n) × F(1, 1) × ... × F(1, 1) =
F(d, n) × F(1, 1)s.
In this case, we get a family of cycles in Z(n −1, n + s)
parametrized by RPD(d,n) × T s, where T s denotes the s-dimensional torus (S1)s.
The pullback of a(n−1, n+s) is given by ω⊗β for ω the generator of H1(RPD(d,n))
and β the generator of Hs(T s). By the same argument as above, this family detects
the class SqQ
s a(n −1, n + s) for 2Q ≤D(d, n). Each cycle in the family has volume
at most C(n)d. This proves the inequality V(SqQ
s a(n −1, n + s)) ≤C(n)2Q/n,
giving some more special cases of the upper bounds in Theorem 2.
We now return to the technical problem of showing that algebraic cycles are
ﬂat cycles and that the families we mentioned above are continuous families of ﬂat
cycles. We will prove that the family of real algebraic hypersurfaces F(d, n) deﬁned
in Example 3 is genuinely a continuous family of mod 2 ﬂat (n-1)-cycles. As a
special case, it follows that the family F(d, 2) in Example 2 is a continuous family
of ﬂat cycles, and it also follows that the products in Example 5 are continuous
families of ﬂat cycles. This material is probably old, but I don’t know a reference
for it.
Let us start by considering the following special case. Fix a polynomial P ̸= 0,
and consider the two polynomials P −δ and P + δ for a small real number δ. If
δ is small, the two polynomials are close together in the space of all polynomials.
The vanishing sets of these two polynomials are P −1(δ) and P −1(−δ). These two
cycles bound a chain P −1([−δ, δ]). We have to show that if δ is small, then this
chain has small volume. The following lemma gives such a bound.
Lemma 6.1. Suppose that P is a real polynomial of degree at most d in n vari-
ables. We can write P in multi-index notation as P(x) = P
|I|≤d cIxI. Suppose
that max |cI| = M.
Then the set {x ∈B(1)||P(x)| ≤δ} has volume at most
C(d, n)[M −1δ]
1
dn .
Remark: This estimate is far from sharp. For our purposes, it doesn’t matter
what power of δ appears in the estimate.
Proof. By scaling, it suﬃces to prove the theorem when M = 1. We ﬁrst consider
the trivial case that maxI̸=0 |cI| ≤(1/2)n−d. In this case, we must have |c0| = 1.


48
LARRY GUTH
But then |P(x)| ≥1/2 everywhere, and so our inequality holds automatically. We
may assume that maxI̸=0 |cI| ≥c(d, n).
By scaling, it suﬃces to prove that if
maxI̸=0 |cI| = 1, then the volume of P −1([−δ, δ]) is at most C(d, n)δ
1
dn .
We proceed by induction on n. First we do the case n = 1.
Divide the 1-dimensional ball [−1, 1] into at most d segments Si so that P is
monotonic on each segment. Let ¯Si := Si ∩P −1([−δ, δ]). Because P is monotonic
on Si, each ¯Si is a single segment.
The oscillation of P on ¯Si is at most 2δ.
Therefore, it suﬃces to check that the oscillation of P on a segment S ⊂[−1, 1] of
length |S| is at least C(d)|S|d.
We write P(x) = Pd
i=0 cixd. The dth derivative P (d) is a constant d!cd. There-
fore, the oscillation of P (d−1) on a segment S is d!|cd||S|. We can choose a sub-
segment S1 ⊂S with |S1| ≥(1/4)|S| so that on S1, |P (d−1)| is constant up to
a factor of 2 with size on the order of |cd||S|. (In particular, the sign of P (d−1)
is constant on S1.) Therefore, the oscillation of P (d−2) on S1 is on the order of
|cd||S|2 + |cd−1||S|. We can choose a subsegment S2 ⊂S1 with |S2| ≥(1/8)|S1| so
that on S2, |P (d−2)| is constant up to a factor of 2. Therefore, the oscillation of
P (d−3) on S2 is on the order of |cd||S|3 + |cd−1||S|2 + |cd−2||S|. Continuing in this
way, we eventually produce a subsegment of S where the oscillation of P is at least
c(d)[|cd||S|d + ... + |c1||S|]. In particular the oscillation is at least c(d)|S|d. This
proves our lemma in case n = 1.
Now we turn to the inductive step. We assume that the lemma holds for n −1.
Let P be a polynomial in n variables of degree d. As we described at the beginning
of the proof, we can assume that |cI| = 1 for a non-zero index I. By reordering
the variables, we can assume that xn divides xI.
We sort the monomials of P
according to the power of xn, writing P(x) = Pd
i=0 Pi(x1, ..., xn−1)xi
n. Here, each
Pi is a polynomial of degree at most d in the ﬁrst n −1 variables. By assumption,
one of the Pi with i ̸= 0 has a coeﬃcient with norm 1. Using induction, we can
apply the lemma to the polynomial Pi. We conclude that |Pi| ≥β except for a set
B of measure C(d, n)β
1
(n−1)d , for a number β that we can choose later. Suppose
(x1, ..., xn−1) is not in B. Fixing this choice of (x1, ..., xn−1), we consider P as a
polynomial in the one variable xn. This polynomial has largest coeﬃcient of size at
least β. By applying the lemma to this 1-dimensional polynomial, we conclude that
|P(xn)| ≥δ except for a subset of values of xn of volume at most C(d, n)(β−1δ)1/d.
We take β = δ
n−1
n , ﬁnishing the induction.
□
With this lemma in hand, we can prove the continuity of F(d, n). Let P be a real
degree d polynomial in n variables. We write P = P cIxI, and we deﬁne ∥P∥=
[P |cI|2]1/2. We consider the family of all P of norm 1. This family is parametrized
by the sphere S = {cI| P |cI|2 = 1}. Let VP denote the set {x ∈Bn(1)|P(x) = 0}.
For an open set of full measure in S, the variety VP is a smooth hypersurface which
meets the boundary of Bn(1) transversely. In this case, VP clearly deﬁnes a mod
2 Lipschitz cycle and hence a mod 2 ﬂat cycle. We let S0 ⊂S denote this open set
of full measure. We deﬁne a map F(d, n) : S0 →Z(n −1, n) by mapping P to VP
considered as a ﬂat cycle. We note that VP = V−P . Therefore, if P is contained in
S0, then so is −P, and F(d, n)(P) = F(d, n)(−P).
Lemma 6.2. If P and Q are in S0, then the area-distance from VP to VQ is at
most C(d, n)∥P −Q∥ǫ(d,n), for a constant ǫ(d, n) > 0.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
49
In particular, the map F(d, n) extends to a continuous map from S to Z(n−1, n).
Since F(d, n)(P) = F(d, n)(−P), the same holds for the extension, and so we can
take a quotient by the action of Z2, giving a map F(d, n) : RPD(d,n) →Z(n −1, n).
This F(d, n) is the family of degree d real algebraic hypersurfaces described in
Example 3 above.
Proof. Let F(x, t) = (1−t)P +tQ. We let VF = {(x, t) ∈Bn(1)×[0, 1]|F(x, t) = 0}.
For each P ∈S0, for almost every Q ∈S0, the set VF is a smooth manifold meeting
the boundary of Bn(1) × [0, 1] transversely. For the time being, we assume that
this is true for P and Q.
Then VF is a relative n-cycle in Bn(1) × [0, 1].
Let
π : Bn(1) × [0, 1] →Bn(1) be the projection onto the ﬁrst factor. Then π(VF ) is
a relative Lipschitz n-chain in Bn(1) with boundary VP −VQ. The area-distance
from VP to VQ is at most the volume of π(VF ). In the rest of the proof, we give an
upper bound for this volume.
Let A be the image of VF under the map π, considered as a subset of Bn(1). No-
tice that for almost every point of a ∈A, π−1(a) is a single point in VF . Therefore,
it suﬃces to bound the volume of A. We know that the volume of VF is at most
C(n)d by an argument using the Crofton formula. Since π : VF →A is 1-to-1 over
almost every point of A, we can view almost all of VF as the graph on a function
T : A →[0, 1]. Therefore we get the following integral inequality.
Z
A
(1 + |∇T |2)1/2 ≤C(n)d.
At a point x, ∇T = −∇xF(x, T (x))/∂tF(x, T (x)).
We now give bounds for
∇F. Let δ := ∥P −Q∥. The time derivative ∂tF(x, t) = −P(x) + Q(x), and so
|∂tF(x, t)| ≤C(d, n)δ. On the other hand, the space derivative ∇xF(x, t) is equal
to (1 −t)∇P + t∇Q = ∇P + t∇(Q −P). Now, the coeﬃcients of ∇(Q −P) are at
most C(d, n)δ, and so |t∇(Q −P)| ≤C(d, n)δ. Therefore, |∇xF(x, t) −∇P(x)| ≤
C(d, n)δ. Plugging these bounds into our last equation, we get the following.
Z
A
δ−1|∇P| ≤C(d, n).
Our next idea is to apply the previous lemma to control the volume of the set
where |∇P| is small. We have assumed that ∥P∥= 1. As a corollary of the last
lemma, the oscillation of P is at least c(d, n). Therefore, the maximum of |∂iP|
must be at least c(d, n) for some i. We ﬁx this choice of i. Now ∂iP is a polynomial
of degree d-1 with norm ∥∂iP∥≥c(d, n) > 0. Applying the lemma, we conclude
that the set where |∂iP| is at most δ1/2 has volume at most C(d, n)δ
1
2dn . Using the
last equation, we see that the volume of A is at most C(d, n)δ
1
2dn + C(d, n)δ1/2.
So far we have assumed that VF was non-singular and transverse to the boundary.
For each P, this assumption holds for almost every R, but it may not hold for Q.
Hence we bound the area-distance from P to almost every R. Similarly, we bound
the area-distance from Q to almost every R. Now we may choose a polynomial R
which is good for both P and Q and with ∥P −R∥+ ∥R −Q∥≤2∥P −Q∥.
□
7. Appendix 1: The standard definition of flat cycles
In this appendix, we recall the standard deﬁnition of the space of ﬂat cycles.
We check that it is equivalent to the deﬁnition given in Section 1. The standard
deﬁnition is more complicated than the deﬁnition we gave in Section 1. The reason


50
LARRY GUTH
that the standard deﬁnition is worthwhile is that one constructs not only a space of
ﬂat cycles but a chain complex of ﬂat chains, containing the ﬂat cycles as a subset.
In other contexts, especially in the theory of minimal surfaces, one is interested in
the whole chain complex, but in this paper we were concerned only with the space
of cycles.
As in Section 1, we let Irel(k, n) denote the complex of relative, mod 2 Lipschitz
k-chains in the unit n-ball. We deﬁne a distance function on this space of k-chains
as follows. We deﬁne the ﬂat norm of a k-chain C to be the inﬁmum, over all
(k+1)-chains D of |D| + |∂D −C|. We need to make a remark about this formula
in the context of relative chains. We view D and C as relative chains, and so we
also view ∂D−C as a relative chain, and we measure its volume as a relative chain.
For example, if C is the line x = 0 in the unit disk and D is the relative 2-chain
given by x ≥0 in the unit disk, then ∂D −C is zero and has volume zero. If we
were working with absolute chains instead of relative ones, then ∂D −C would be
a semicircle with volume π.
In the ﬁgure below, we illustrate the sum |D| + |∂D −C| for a 1-chain C and a
2-chain D in the unit disk.
Figure 9
C
D
The 1-chain C is shown in a solid line. The 2-chain D is the region enclosed by C
and by the dotted lines. The volume of |∂D −C| is the sum of the lengths of the
two dotted lines. Because we are working with relative chains, it does not include
the length of the arc of the circle bordering D.
The ﬂat distance between two chains C1 and C2 is deﬁned to be the ﬂat norm
of C1 −C2. We say that C1 and C2 are equivalent if the ﬂat distance between
them is zero. The set of equivalence classes of relative Lipschitz chains is a metric
space. We deﬁne the completion of this metric space to be the space of relative ﬂat
k-chains in the unit n-ball, Irel,flat(k, n).
We say that a ﬂat chain C has volume less than V if C is a limit of relative
Lipschitz chains Ci with volume less than V .


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
51
If C is a relative Lipschitz k-chain, then the ﬂat norm of its boundary is at most
the ﬂat norm of C. Suppose that |D| + |∂D −C| is close to the ﬂat norm of C. We
use the k-chain C −∂D to bound the ﬂat norm of ∂C. We get that the ﬂat norm of
the boundary of C is at most |C −∂D|+|∂(C −∂D)−∂C|. The second term is zero,
and so the ﬂat norm of ∂C is at most |C −∂D|, which is at most |C −∂D| + |D|,
which is within ǫ of the ﬂat norm of C. Therefore, the ﬂat distance between ∂C1
and ∂C2 is at most the ﬂat distance between C1 and C2. Therefore, the boundary
operation extends to a continuous map from Irel,flat(k + 1, n) to Irel,flat(k, n).
Now we can deﬁne the space of ﬂat cycles Zflat(k, n) to be the space of cycles
in the complex Irel,flat(k, n). We give Zflat(k, n) the subspace topology inherited
from Irel,flat(k, n).
The goal of this appendix is to check that the space Zflat(k, n) is exactly the
space Z(k, n) deﬁned in Section 1.
The main point here is that if C1 and C2 are two relative Lipschitz k-cycles in
the unit n-ball, then the ﬂat distance between them is equal to the area-distance
between them. The area distance is the inﬁmum over all Lipschitz chains D with
∂D = C of |D|.
On the other hand, the ﬂat distance is the inﬁmum over all
Lipschitz chains D of |D|+|∂D −C|. It follows that the ﬂat distance is at most the
area distance. On the other hand, suppose that D is any relative Lipschitz k-chain
and that E is the cone over C −∂D with vertex at the origin. Then E is a relative
Lipschitz (k+1)-chain with volume at most (k + 1)−1|∂D −C| ≤|∂D −C|. Then
∂(D + E) = C and |D + E| ≤|D| + |∂D −C|. Therefore, the ﬂat distance is equal
to the area distance.
Now we can check that Z(k, n) is contained in Zflat(k, n). Certainly each Lip-
schitz k-cycle is contained in Irel(k, n).
Hence Z(k, n) is exactly the subset of
Zflat(k, n) which is given by limits of Lipschitz k-cycles.
We have one more point to check. If z is a cycle in Zflat(k, n), it is not apriori
clear that z can be written as a limit of Lipschitz k-cycles. By deﬁnition, a cycle
z ∈Zflat(k, n) is a limit of relative Lipschitz chains Ci. The fact that ∂z = 0 implies
∂Ci converges to zero in the ﬂat topology, but it doesn’t imply that ∂Ci = 0 for any
ﬁnite i. For each Ci, we can choose a k-chain Di so that |Di|+|∂Di −∂Ci| →0. By
the isoperimetric inequality, we can ﬁnd another k-chain Ei with ∂Ei = ∂Ci −∂Di
and with |Ei| →0. We let ˜Ci = Ci −Di −Ei. Each ˜Ci is a Lipschitz cycle. On the
other hand, the ﬂat distance from ˜Ci to Ci is at most |Di| + |Ei| →0. Therefore,
˜Ci converges to z in the ﬂat topology.
In summary, we have shown that Zflat(k, n) and Z(k, n) are the same underlying
set equipped with the same metric and hence the same topology.
8. Appendix 2: Integral cycles
The minimax problem described in this paper makes equally good sense for
integral cycles in place of mod 2 cycles. The lower bounds in this paper generalize
to families of integral cycles. Using families of complex algebraic cycles, we can
prove matching upper bounds for some cohomology classes. For most cohomology
classes, however, there is a large gap between the best upper and lower bounds that
we can prove.
Let ZZ(k, n) denote the space of integral relative k-cycles in the unit n-ball. For
a cohomology class α in H∗(ZZ(k, n)), we deﬁne F(α) to be the set of all families of
integral cycles, F : P →ZZ(k, n), that detect the cohomology class α in the sense


52
LARRY GUTH
that F ∗(α) is non-zero in H∗(P). (This deﬁnition makes sense for any choice of
coeﬃcients in the cohomology groups.) Then we deﬁne the minimax volume V(α)
by the following formula.
V(α) =
inf
F ∈F(α) sup
C∈F
mass(C).
Using the methods in Section 1, we can construct a fundamental cohomol-
ogy class aZ(k, n) in Hn−k(ZZ(k, n), Z). We can then reduce this class to either
Hn−k(ZZ(k, n), Q) or Hn−k(ZZ(k, n), Z2).
We denote these cohomology classes
a(k, n, Z), a(k, n, Q), and a(k, n, Z2).
All of the lower bounds in the paper apply without modiﬁcation to the space of
integral cycles.
Theorem 1A. (Lower bounds) Let a(k, n) be short for any of the classes a(k, n, Z),
a(k, n, Q), or a(k, n, Z2). Then the following lower bound holds.
V(a(k, n)p) ≥c(n)p
n−k
n .
Theorem 2A. (Lower bounds) For each ǫ > 0, there is a constant c(n, ǫ) > 0 so
that the following estimate holds.
V(SqQ0
0 ...SqQn−k−1
n−k−1 a(k, n, Z2)) ≥c(n, ǫ)
n−k−1
Y
i=0
(2 −ǫ)
n−k−i
n−i
Qi.
Remark: If Almgren’s arguments apply to the space of ﬂat cycles, which they
probably do, then ZZ(k, n) is weak homotopic to an Eilenberg-Maclane space K(Z, n−
k). The mod 2 cohomology ring of K(Z, n −k) was determined by Serre in [18]. It
is a free algebra over Z2 generated by SqQ1
1 ...SqQn−k−2
n−k−2 a(k, n, Z2).
We can prove some interesting upper bounds by using families of complex alge-
braic cycles. These upper bounds are not completely rigorous, because we haven’t
checked that the families of algebraic cycles are continuous in the space ZZ(k, n).
The continuity sounds true to me. Related results are mentioned in [13], for exam-
ple.
Example 1. Suppose that n is even and that a(n −2, n) is short for any of the
classes a(n −2, n, Z), a(n −2, n, Z2), or a(n −2, n, Q). Then V(a(n −2, n)p) ≤
C(n)p2/n. This upper bound matches the lower bound in Theorem 1A up to a
constant factor.
Proof. We have n = 2m, and so we can view the unit ball Bn as the unit ball in
complex space Cm. We consider the family of complex hypersurfaces of degree at
most d. This family is parametrized by CPNm(d), where Nm(d) ∼dm. It detects
the class a(n −2, n)p for all p ≤Nm(d). Each complex hypersurface intersected
with the unit n-ball has volume at most C(n)d. Hence V(a(n −2, n)p) ≤C(n)d for
p ≤c(n)dm, and so V(a(n −2, n)p) ≤C(n)p2/n.
□
Example 2. Suppose that n is even. Then V(SqQ
s a(n−2, n+s, Z2)) ≤C(n)2
2
n Q.
According to Theorem 2A, this minimax volume is at least c(n, ǫ)(2 −ǫ)
2
n Q. Hence
the upper and lower bounds match up to a factor that grows sub-exponentially in
Q.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
53
Proof. The proof is essentially the same as in Example 5 of Section 6. Let F(1, 1)
denote a family of 0-cycles in the unit 1-ball consisting of a single point that moves
from one end of the interval to the other. We can think of F(1, 1) as a family of
integral 0-cycles that detects a(0, 1, Z) and also a(0, 1, Z2). Take the product of
F(1, 1)s with Example 1 above.
□
For many other cases, there is a big gap between the best upper and lower
bounds.
The simplest example concerns 1-cycles in the unit 3-ball.
Our best
lower bound for V(a(1, 3, Z)p) is cp2/3.
The only upper bound that I know for
V(a(1, 3, Z)p) is Cp, which we get by considering families of p vertical lines.
9. Appendix 3: Minimax volumes of Riemannian manifolds
Minimax volumes analogous to those we have studied can also be deﬁned using
a Riemannian manifold (M n, g) in place of the unit n-ball.
Let Z(k, M) denote the space of absolute mod 2 k-cycles in M. If M has a bound-
ary, then let Zrel(k, M) denote the space of relative mod 2 k-cycles in (M, ∂M). The
construction of the fundamental cohomology class a(k, n) generalizes to the setting
of manifolds. If M is a closed n-manifold, then we get a fundamental cohomology
class a(k, M) ∈Hn−k(Z(k, M)). If M is a compact n-manifold with boundary,
then we get a fundamental cohomology class a(k, M) ∈Hn−k(Zrel(k, M)).
If α is any cohomology class in H∗(Z(k, M)), then we can deﬁne a minimax
volume associated to α. We let F(α) denote the set of all families of cycles F : P →
Z(k, M) that detect α. Then we deﬁne a minimax volume V(M,g)(α) by the usual
formula.
V(M,g)(α) =
inf
F ∈F(α) sup
C∈F
Vol(C).
We need the metric g in order to measure the volumes of k-cycles in M. For a ﬁxed
choice of M and α, the minimax volume V(M,g)(α) is a function of g. Roughly
speaking, this function measures how large the manifold (M, g) is. If g ≥h, then
it’s easy to check that V(M,g)(α) ≥V(M,h)(α).
These minimax volumes can be used to control the geometry of degree 1 maps
between Riemannian manifolds. If Φ : M →N is a Lipschitz map, then it induces
a map Zk(Φ) from Z(k, M) to Z(k, N) for every k. Similarly, if Φ : (M, ∂M) →
(N, ∂N) is a Lipschitz map of pairs, then it induces a map Zk(Φ) from Zrel(k, M)
to Zrel(k, N). In either case, the pullback Zk(Φ)∗[a(k, N)] = (deg Φ)a(k, M). This
equation follows directly from the construction of a(k, M).
If Φ : M →N is a piecewise C1 map, then we say that the k-dilation of Φ is
at most Λ if Φ maps each k-dimensional submanifold of M with volume V to an
image with volume at most ΛV .
Proposition 9.1. Suppose that Φ : (M, g) →(N, h) is a C1 map with degree 1
mod 2 and k-dilation Λ. Suppose that O denotes any natural cohomology operation
with mod 2 coeﬃcients. In particular, O may denote a cup power or any tower of
Steenrod squares. Then the following inequality holds.
ΛV(M,g)(Oa(k, M)) ≥V(N,h)(Oa(k, N)).


54
LARRY GUTH
Proof. For any δ > 0, let Fδ be a family of k-cycles in M that detects Oa(k, M)
with volume at most V(M,g)(Oa(k, M)) + δ. Then Φ(Fδ) is a family of k-cycles in
(N, h) that detects Oa(k, N) with volume at most Λ[V(M, g)(Oa(k, M)) + δ].
□
This proposition gives a large number of lower bounds for the k-dilation Λ of a
degree 1 map from (M, g) to (N, h). If N has a boundary, then we can formulate
a slightly more general version of this proposition.
Proposition 9.2. Suppose that (M n, g) is a compact n-manifold and that (N, h)
is a compact n-manifold with boundary. Suppose that U ⊂M is an open set with a
piecewise smooth boundary. Suppose that Φ : (U, ∂U) →(N, ∂N) is a piecewise C1
map with degree 1 mod 2 and k-dilation Λ. Let O be a cohomology operation. Then
the following inequality holds.
ΛV(M,g)(Oa(k, M)) ≥V(N,h)(Oa(k, N)).
Proof. For any δ > 0, let Fδ be a family of k-cycles in M that detects Oa(k, M)
with volume at most V(M,g)(Oa(k, M)) + δ. Let ˆFδ be the restriction of this family
to U.
The family ˆFδ detects Oa(k, U) with volume at most V(M,g)(Oa(k, M)).
Then Φ( ˆFδ) is a family of k-cycles in (N, h) that detects Oa(k, N) with volume at
most Λ[V(M,g)(Oa(k, M)) + δ].
□
In my thesis [9], I studied the k-dilation of degree 1 maps between various sets
in Euclidean space. The main theorem of the thesis is the following.
Theorem. ([9], [10]) Suppose that R and S are n-dimensional rectangles with di-
mensions R1 ≤... ≤Rn and S1 ≤... ≤Sn respectively. Suppose that U ⊂R is an
open set with a piecewise C1 boundary and that Φ : U →S is a degree 1 piecewise
C1 map with k-dilation Λ. Let Qi = Si/Ri. Then for each integer 0 ≤j ≤k and
each number k + 1 ≤l ≤n, the following inequality holds.
Λ ≥c(n)(Q1...Qj)(Qj+1...Ql)
k−j
l−j .
(∗)
Conversely, for each pair of rectangles R, S, there is a set U ⊂R and a degree 1
map from U to S with k-dilation at most C(n) maxj,l(Q1...Qj)(Qj+1...Ql)
k−j
l−j .
When I began the work on the material in this paper, one of my motivations was
to ﬁnd a new proof of (∗). According to the last proposition, we have the following
lower bounds for Λ.
Λ ≥VS(Oa(k, S))/VR(Oa(k, R)).
Hence, if we could estimate the minimax volumes of a rectangle up to a constant
factor, we would get many lower bounds for Λ. We end with a conjecture about
the minimax volumes that would imply (∗).
Conjecture. For each k + 1 ≤l ≤n, the minimax volume VR(SqQ
n−la(k, R)) is
equal to the following expression up to a constant factor C(n).
VR(SqQ
n−la(k, R)) ∼
inf
0≤j≤k R1...Rj(Rj+1...Rl)
k−j
l−j 2
l−k
l−j Q.


MINIMAX PROBLEMS RELATED TO CUP POWERS AND STEENROD SQUARES
55
References
[1] Almgren, F., The homotopy groups of the integral cycle groups, Topology 1, 1962, 257-299.
[2] Almgren, F., The theory of varifolds - a variational calculus in the large for the k-dimensional
area integrated, unpublished.
[3] Arnold, V., Topological problems in wave propagation theory and topological economy princi-
ple in algebraic geometry. The Arnoldfest (Toronto, ON, 1997), 39-54, Fields Inst. Commun.
24, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence RI 1999.
[4] Cornea, O.; Lupton, G.; Oprea, J.; and Tanre, D.; Lusternik-Schnirelmann Category, Math-
ematical Surveys and Monographs Volume 103, American Mathematical Society, 2003.
[5] Gromov, M., Filling Riemannian manifolds, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 18 (1983) no. 1, 1-147.
[6] Gromov, M., Systoles and intersystolic inequalities. Actes de la Table Ronde de Geometrie
Diﬀerentielle (Luminy, 1992) 291-362, Semin. Cong., 1, Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1996.
[7] Gromov, M., Isoperimetry of waists and concentration of maps, Geom. Funct. Anal. 13 (2003)
no. 1, 178-215.
[8] Guth, L., The width-volume inequality, arxiv math/0609569, to appear in Geometric and
Functional Analysis.
[9] Guth, L., Area-contracting maps between rectangles, Ph. D. Thesis, MIT, 2005.
[10] Guth, L., Area-expanding embeddings of rectangles, arXiv:0710.0403.
[11] Hatcher, A., Algebraic Topology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002.
[12] Lam, T.-K., Spaces of Real Algebraic Cycles and Homotopy Theory, Ph.D. Thesis, Univ. at
Stonybrook, 1990.
[13] Lawson, H. B., Algebraic cycles and homotopy theory, Ann. of Math. 129, (1989), 253-291.
[14] Lawson, H. B., Cycles and spectra, Bull. Braz. Math. Soc., New Series 34(1) (2003), 77-105.
[15] Mostovoy, J., Geometry of truncated symmetric products and real roots of real polynomials,
Bull. London Math. Soc. 30 (1998) no. 2, 159-165.
[16] Nakaoka, M., Cohomology mod p of symmetric products of spheres, J. Inst. Polytech. Osaka
City Univ. Ser. A 9, 1958, 1-18.
[17] Pitts, J., Existence and Regularity of Minimal Surfaces on Riemannian Manifolds, Math-
ematical Notes 27, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, University of Tokyo Press,
Tokyo, 1981.
[18] Serre, J. P., Cohomologie modulo 2 des complexes d’Eilenberg-Maclane, Comment. Math.
Helv. 27, (1953) 198-232.
Department of Mathematics, Stanford, Stanford CA, 94305 USA
E-mail address: lguth@math.stanford.edu


v1
v2
v2
v1
negative
positive
